{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deftab1134{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\lang2057\ul\b\f0\fs24 MICHEL THOMAS FRENCH (BASIC) COURSE, 8 CDs\par
TRANSCRIPT\par
\ulnone\b0\i\par
This is an approximate transcript of the course, since Michel often changed his mind in the middle of a sentence to be translated, or adapted his sentences for the students. The booklet that accompanied Michel's courses was wholly inadequate, so I have written this transcript. I have found it useful, so maybe other people will, too. \par
\par
Naturally, it would be foolish to try to learn the language using this transcript, without buying the recordings.\par
\par
Note that English is my native language, so I don't guarantee that there are no mistakes. Tracks and track times in the recording are shown in brackets. \par
\i0\par
\i Version 2, Jan 15th 2006\par
Transcribed by JK\par
\b\i0\par
\ul CD 1 (58.09)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 4.49\par
(2) 9.18\par
(\b\i -ible \b0 words stay the same in french)\i0\par
possible \b possible\b0\par
(\b\i -able \b0 words stay the same in French)\i0\par
table \b table \b0\par
comfortable \b confortable\b0\par
possible\par
table\par
comfortable\par
it is, that is \b c'est\b0\par
life \b la vie\b0\par
it is possible \b c'est possible\b0\par
it is comfortable \b c'est confortable\b0\par
good \b bon\b0\par
it is good \b c'est bon\b0\par
very \b tr\'e8s\b0\par
it is very good \b c'est tr\'e8s bon\b0\par
it is very comfortable \b c'est tr\'e8s confortable\b0\par
probable \b probable\b0\par
acceptable \b acceptable\b0\par
it is acceptable \b c'est acceptable\b0\par
for me \b pour moi \b0\par
it is for me \b c'est pour moi\b0\par
for you \b pour vous\b0\par
it is for you \b c'est pour vous\b0\par
it is very comfortable for me \b c'est tr\'e8s confortable pour moi\b0\par
it is\par
it is not \b ce n'est pas\b0\par
not \b pas\b0\par
it is not for me thank you \b ce n'est pas pour moi merci\b0\par
thanks \b merci\b0\par
it is\par
it is not\par
it is not for me\par
not for me thanks \b pas pour moi merci\b0\par
it is not very comfortable for me \b ce n'est pas tr\'e8s confortable pour moi\b0\par
(3) 5.12\par
so-so \b comme ci, comme \'e7a\b0\par
(\i literally \ldblquote like this, like that\rdblquote\i0 )\par
like that, that way \b comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is like that \b c'est comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is not like that \b ce n'est pas comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is not possible for me that way \b ce n'est pas possible pour moi comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is not possible for me like that \par
I'm sorry \b je regrette\b0\par
I'm sorry, but \b je regrette, mais\b0\par
I'm sorry but it is not very comfortable for me that way \b je regrette, mais ce n'est pas tr\'e8s confortable pour moi comme \'e7a\b0\par
I'm sorry but it is not acceptable for me that way \b je regrette, mais ce n'est pas acceptable pour moi comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is very remarkable \b c'est tr\'e8s remarquable \b0\par
considerable \b considerable\b0\par
(4) 8.41\par
(\b\i -ent, -ant\b0  words stay the same in French\i0 )\par
different \b diff\'e9rent\b0\par
important \b important\b0\par
it is not very difficult that way \b ce n'est pas tr\'e8s diff\'e9rent comme \'e7a\b0\par
but it is very important for me \b mais c'est tr\'e8s important pour moi\b0\par
(\i the \b s \b0 of \b tr\'e8s \b0 leans into a following vowel, sounding like a \b z\b0 , i.e. \b\i0 tre zimportant\b0 )\par
evident \b\'e9vident\b0\par
recent \b r\'e9cent\b0\par
constant \b constant\b0\par
(\b\i -ary \b0 words become \b -aire\b0  in French\i0 )\par
necessary \b n\'e9cessaire\b0\par
it is not necessary for me \b ce n'est pas n\'e9cessaire pour moi\b0\par
contrary \b contraire\b0\par
on the contrary \b au contraire\b0\par
military \b militaire\b0\par
vocabulary \b vocabulaire\b0\par
I would like \b je voudrais\b0\par
to speak \b parler\b0\par
to speak French \b parler fran\'e7ais\b0\par
I would like to speak French \b je voudrais parler fran\'e7ais\b0\par
with \b avec\b0\par
with you \b avec vous\b0\par
with me \b avec moi\b0\par
I would like to speak French with you \b je voudrais parler fran\'e7ais avec vous\b0\par
will you, will you please \b voulez-vous\b0\par
will you speak French with me \b voulez-vous parler fran\'e7ais avec moi\b0\par
to come \b venir\b0\par
will you come with me \b voulez-vous venir avec moi\b0\par
to eat \b manger\b0\par
will you eat \b voulez-vous manger\b0\par
to come \par
will you come with me \b voulez-vous venir avec moi\b0\par
will you come eat with me \b voulez-vous venir manger avec moi\b0\par
(5) 4.55\par
to go \b aller\b0\par
to come\par
to go\par
will you go eat with me \b voulez-vous aller manger avec moi\b0\par
where \b o\'f9\b0\par
where do you want to go \b o\'f9 voulez-vous aller?\b0\par
where do you want to go eat \b o\'f9 voulez-vous aller manger?\b0\par
tonight, this evening \b ce soir\b0\par
it is for tonight \b c'est pour ce soir\b0\par
it is for me \b c'est pour moi\b0\par
it is for tonight \b c'est pour ce soir\b0\par
where do you want to go eat tonight \b o\'f9 voulez-vous aller manger ce soir\b0\par
to have dinner \b d\'eener\b0\par
where do you want to have dinner tonight? \b o\'f9 voulez-vous d\'eener ce soir?\b0\par
do you want to come have dinner with me tonight? \b voulez-vous venir diner avec moi ce soir?\b0\par
(6) 4.25\par
to know \b savoir\b0\par
I would like to know \b je voudrais savoir\b0\par
I would like to know where \b je voudrais savoir o\'f9\b0\par
I would like to know where it is \b je voudrais savoir ou c'est\b0\par
how much \b combien\b0\par
I would like to know how much it is \b je voudrais savoir combien c'est\b0\par
something \b quelque chose \b0\par
thing \b la chose\b0\par
the same thing \b la m\'eame chose\b0\par
I would like to eat something \b je voudrais manger quelque chose\b0\par
I would like to eat the same thing \b je voudrais manger la m\'eame chose\b0\par
will you\par
do you want\par
do you want to eat something? \b voulez-vous manger quelque chose?\b0\par
do you want to eat the same thing? \b voulez-vous manger la m\'eame chose?\b0\par
the same thing for me please \b la m\'eame chose pour moi s'il vous pla\'eet\b0\par
please \b s'il vous pla\'eet\b0\par
I would like the same thing for me please \b je voudrais la m\'eame chose pour moi s'il vous pla\'eet\b0\par
(7) 7.17\par
(\b\i -ence\b0 , \b -ance\b0  words stay the same in French\i0 )\par
difference \b diff\'e9rence\b0\par
preference \b pr\'e9f\'e9rer\b0\par
importance \b importance\b0\par
influence \b influence\b0\par
difference \par
the difference \b la diff\'e9rence\b0\par
a difference \b une diff\'e9rence\b0\par
the difference\par
a difference\par
what difference \b quelle diff\'e9rence\b0\par
what, which \b quelle\b0\par
the preference\par
a preference\par
what preference\par
have you, do you have \b avez-vous\b0\par
do you have a preference?  \b avez-vous une pr\'e9f\'e9rence?\b0\par
what preference do you have? \b quelle pr\'e9f\'e9rence avez-vous?\b0\par
for what restaurant do you have a preference tonight? \b pour quel restaurant avez-vous une pr\'e9f\'e9rence ce soir?\b0\par
(\b\i -ion\b0  words stay the same in French\i0 )\par
opinion \b opinion\b0\par
condition \b condition\b0\par
the condition\par
a condition\par
what condition\par
position \b position\b0\par
the position\par
a position\par
what position\par
reservation \b r\'e9servation\b0\par
the reservation\par
a reservation\par
what reservation\par
have you, do you have\par
do you have a reservation for me for tonight? \b avez-vous une r\'e9servation pour moi pour ce soir?\b0\par
(8) 9.02\par
what kind \b quelle sorte\b0\par
of \b de\b0\par
 what kind of reservation do you have for me for tonight? \b quelle sorte de r\'e9servation avez-vous pour moi pour ce soir?\b0\par
will you\par
do you want\par
 what kind of reservation do you want for tonight? \b quelle sorte de r\'e9servation voulez-vous pour ce soir?\b0\par
(\i the 1200 nouns which end \b -ion \b0 in French are identical in English, there are only three exceptions\i0 )\par
translation \b traduction\b0\par
I would like a translation \b je voudrais une traduction\b0\par
to do, to make \b faire\b0\par
 will you make a reservation for me? \b voulez-vous faire une r\'e9servation pour moi?\b0\par
what kind of reservation to you want to make? \b quelle sorte de r\'e9servation voulez-vous faire?\b0\par
will you make a translation for me? \b voulez-vous faire une traduction pour moi?\b0\par
explanation \b explication\b0\par
to give \b donner\b0\par
will you give an explanation for me? \b  voulez-vous donner une explication pour moi?\b0\par
vacation  \b les vacances\b0\par
to spend (time) \b passer\b0\par
to spend (money) \b d\'e9penser\b0\par
to spend the vacation \b passer les vacances\b0\par
where do you want to spend the vacation? \b o\'f9 voulez-vous passer les vacances?\b0\par
the situation \b la situation\b0\par
what impression do you have? \b quelle impression avez-vous?\b0\par
what impression do you have of the situation?\b  quelle impression avez-vous de la situation?\b0\par
(9) 4.30\par
(\i -ical words become -ique in French\i0 )\par
political \b politique\b0\par
economical \b\'e9conomique\b0\par
philosophical \b philosophique\b0\par
astronomical \b astronomique\b0\par
logical \b logique\b0\par
practical \b pratique\b0\par
it is not logical, but it is very practical that way \b ce n'est pas logique, mais c'est tr\'e8s pratique comme \'e7a\b0\par
(\i French adjectives follow the noun\i0 )\par
the political situation\b  la situation politique\b0\par
the economical situation \b la situation \'e9conomique\b0\par
and\b  et\b0\par
the political and economic situation\b  la situation politique et \'e9conomique\b0\par
in France, to France \b en France\b0\par
I would like to go to France \b je voudrais aller en France\b0\par
I would like to spend the vacation in France \b je voudrais passer les vacances en France\b0\par
\ul\b\par
\ulnone\b0 (end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 2 (61.27)\ulnone\b0\par
(1) 8.38\par
what impression do you have of the political and economical situation in France? \b quelle impression avez-vous de la situation politique et \'e9conomique en France?\b0\par
at the present time \b\'e0 pr\'e9sent\b0\par
 what kind of reservation do you have for me? \b quelle sorte de r\'e9servation avez-vous pour moi?\b0\par
what kind of reservation do you want for tonight? \b quelle sorte de r\'e9servation voulez-vous pour ce soir?\b0\par
(\i consonants at the end of the word are not sounded, unless they are followed by a silent \b -e\i0 )\b0\par
small \b petit\b0\par
it is very small \b c'est tr\'e8s petit\b0\par
too, too much\b  trop\b0\par
it is too small \b c'est trop petit\b0\par
late \b tard\b0\par
it is very late \b c'est tr\'e8s tard\b0\par
it is too late \b c'est trop tard\b0\par
it is too much for me \b c'est trop pour moi\b0\par
(\i pronunciation of \b petite\b0 , \b grande\b0\i0 )\par
he is big \b il est grand\b0\par
she is big \b elle est grande\b0\par
she is little \b elle est petite\b0\par
(\i pronunciation of \b vit, vite\b0\i0 )\par
fast \b vit\b0\par
it is very fast \b c'est tr\'e8s vit\b0\par
it is too fast for me \b c'est trop vite pour moi\b0\par
(2) 5.57\par
to speak\par
(\i infinitive verbs end \b -r \b0 e.g. \b parler\b0\i0 )\par
you speak \b vous parlez\b0\par
you speak too fast for me \b vous parlez trop vit pour moi\b0\par
to go \b aller\b0\par
you go, you are going \b vous allez\b0\par
you are going too fast for me \b vous allez trop vite pour moi\b0\par
it is very good \b c'est tr\'e8s bon\b0\par
so\b  si\b0\par
it is so good \b c'est si bon\b0\par
if \b si\b0\par
if it is so good \b si c'est si bon\b0\par
I would like to know if it is so good \b je voudrais savoir si c'est si bon\b0\par
why \b pourquoi\b0\par
I would like to know why it is so good \b je voudrais savoir pourquoi c'est si bon\b0\par
to go\par
you are going\par
I would like to know where you are going \b je voudrais savoir o\'f9 vous allez\b0\par
to have dinner\par
I would like to know where you are going to have dinner tonight \b je voudrais savoir o\'f9 vous allez d\'eener ce soir\b0\par
(3) 10.00\par
port, harbour \b port\b0\par
airport \b a\'e9roport\b0\par
door \b porte\b0\par
(\i for consonance may be pronounced at the end of the word: \b c\b0 , \b r\b0 , \b f\b0 , \b l\b0 , the so-called \ldblquote careful\rdblquote  consonants. For example \b avec\b0 , \b sac\b0 , but not words ending \b -nc\b0  e.g. \b blanc\b0\i0 )\par
bag\b  sac\b0\par
white \b blanc\b0\par
franc \b franc\b0\par
white wine \b vin blanc\b0\par
a glass \b un verre\b0\par
a glass of white wine\b  un verre de vin blanc\b0\par
I would like a glass of white wine\b  je voudrais un verre de vin blanc\b0\par
bottle \b bouteille\b0\par
I would like a bottle \b je voudrais une bouteille\b0\par
I would like a bottle of white wine \b je voudrais une bouteille de vin blanc\b0\par
water \b eau\b0\par
from \b de\b0\par
I would like a glass of white wine \b je voudrais un verre de vin blanc\b0\par
I would like a glass of water \b je voudrais un verre d'eau\b0\par
I would like a glass of mineral water \b je voudrais un verre d'eau min\'e9rale\b0\par
(\i words ending \b -el\b0 , \b -al \b0 are the same in French\i0 )\par
normal \b normal\b0\par
normally \b normallement\b0\par
general \b g\'e9n\'e9ral\b0\par
generally \b g\'e9n\'e9ralement\b0\par
animal \b animal\b0\par
special \b sp\'e9cial\b0\par
it is very special\par
especially for you \b sp\'e9cialement pour vous\b0\par
I would like a glass of mineral water\par
cup\b  tasse\b0\par
I would like a cup of coffee \b je voudrais une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
(4) 4.36\par
still, still more\b  encore\b0\par
a little \b un peu\b0\par
I would like a little \b je voudrais un peu\b0\par
late\par
it is very late \b c'est tr\'e8s tard\b0\par
it is too late \b c'est trop tard\b0\par
later, more late \b plus tard\b0\par
to come\par
will you come later \b voulez-vous venir plus tard\b0\par
a little \b un peu\b0\par
a little later \b un peu plus tard\b0\par
will you come a little later \b voulez-vous venir un peu plus tard\b0\par
now \b maintenant\b0\par
not now \b pas maintenant\b0\par
possible\par
possibly \b possiblement\b0\par
not now, possibly a little later \b pas maintenant, possiblement un peu plus tard\b0\par
(5) 4.57\par
I would like to eat something \b je voudrais manger quelque chose\b0\par
(\i "s" between two vowels has the sound of a "z"\i0 )\par
something\par
the same thing\par
I would like to eat the same thing \b je voudrais manger la m\'eame chose\b0\par
other \b autre\b0\par
the other thing \b l'autre chose\b0\par
another thing \b une autre chose\b0\par
something else\b  autre chose\b0\par
I would like something else \b je voudrais autre chose\b0\par
to see \b voir\b0\par
goodbye \b au revoir\b0\par
to see\par
I would like to see something else \b je voudrais voir autre chose\b0\par
do you have something else? \b avez-vous autre chose?\b0\par
do you want something else? \b voulez-vous autre chose?\b0\par
(6) 8.04\par
to know \b savoir\b0\par
to have \b avoir\b0\par
to see \b voir\b0\par
I would like to have something else \b je voudrais avoir autre chose\b0\par
I would like to know \b je voudrais savoir\b0\par
I would like a glass of white wine \b je voudrais un verre de vin blanc\b0\par
I would like another glass of white wine \b je voudrais encore un verre de vin blanc \b0\par
another please! (to waiter) \b encore\b0\par
I would like another bottle of white wine \b je voudrais encore une bouteille de vin blanc\b0\par
I would like a cup of coffee \b je voudrais une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
I would like another cup of coffee  \b je voudrais encore une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
I would like a glass of mineral water \b je voudrais un verre d'eau min\'e9rale\b0\par
I would like another glass of mineral water \b je voudrais encore un verre d'eau min\'e9rale\b0\par
(7) 4.34\par
(\i the final \b -r\b0  is pronounced, except in \b -er\b0  e.g. \b parler\b0 . 90% of French verbs end \b -er\b0 )\i0\par
to go\par
beef \b b\'9cuf\b0\par
(8) 8.39\par
(\i explanation of what noun, adjective and verb means. Infinitives end \b -er\b0 , \b -ir\b0  and \b -re\b0\i0 )\par
to leave \b partir\b0\par
to sleep \b dormir\b0\par
to know\par
to understand \b comprendre\b0\par
to do, make \par
(\i when two or three verbs appear consecutively, all but the first are in infinite form\i0 )\par
will you\par
to come\par
to eat\par
will you come eat with me \b voulez-vous venir manger avec moi\b0\par
I must \b je dois\b0\par
I must speak with you \b je dois parler avec vous\b0\par
will you speak French with me \b voulez-vous parler fran\'e7ais avec moi\b0\par
I must know where it is \b je dois savoir o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
I am \b je suis\b0\par
tired \b fatigu\'e9\b0\par
I am tired\par
I am very tired now\par
busy \b occup\'e9\b0\par
I am very busy now\par
(9) 6.02\par
a little \par
I can\b  je peux\b0\par
I can a little \b je peux un peu\b0\par
not now \b pas maintenant\b0\par
not for me thank you \b pas pour moi merci\b0\par
I can\par
I cannot \b je ne peux pas\b0\par
(\i French uses a negative signal \b ne\b0  for any kind of negation, which is often dropped in the spoken language, e.g "I cannot" \b je peux pas\b0\i0 )\par
I am\par
I am not \b je ne suis pas\b0\par
I'm not tired now \b je ne suis pas fatigu\'e9 maintenant\b0\par
but I'm very busy now mais \b je suis tr\'e8s fatigu\'e9 maintenant\b0\par
I'm sorry, but\par
but I'm not very busy now mais \b je ne suis pas tr\'e8s occup\'e9 maintenant\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 3 (62.22)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 4.41\par
to wait \b attendre\b0\par
to leave\par
I am sorry but I cannot wait because I have to leave now \b je regrette, mais je ne peux pas attendre parce que je dois partir maintenant\b0\par
I'm sorry \b je suis d\'e9sol\'e9e\b0\par
I'm sorry, but \b je suis d\'e9sol\'e9e, mais\b0\par
I can\par
I cannot\par
(2) 6.08\par
I'm sorry but I cannot come with you now because I am very busy \b je suis desol\'e9e, mais je ne peux pas venir avec vous parce que je suis tr\'e8s occup\'e9\b0\par
I would like to speak with you \b je voudrais parler avec vous\b0\par
I have to speak with you \par
you speak \b je voudrais encore une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
(\i in a question, invert the subject and verb\i0 ) \par
do you speak? \b parlez-vous?\b0\par
to speak French? \b parlez-vous fran\'e7ais?\b0\par
to go \par
you are going \b vous allez\b0\par
are you going? \b allez-vous?\b0\par
where are you going? \b o\'f9 allez-vous?\b0\par
to have dinner\par
where are you going to have dinner tonight?\b  o\'f9 allez-vous d\'eener ce soir?\b0\par
(3) 3.48\par
to leave\par
you are leaving \b vous partez\b0\par
at what time? \b\'e0 quelle heure?\b0\par
at what time are you leaving? \b\'e0 quelle heure partez-vous?\b0\par
at what time do you leave?\par
to stay \b rester\b0\par
you are staying \b vous restez\b0\par
I am staying \b je reste\b0\par
he\par
he is staying \b il reste\b0\par
she\par
she is staying \b elle reste\b0\par
my friend \b mon ami\b0\par
my friend is staying \b mon ami reste\b0\par
everybody \b tout le monde\b0\par
(4) 3.20\par
I am staying\par
I am not staying\par
I don't stay\par
(\i there are three ways to express the present tense in English, which are all translated the same way into French\i0 )\par
(5) 3.10\par
I am busy\par
I am not busy now\par
I am tired\par
I am not tired\par
ready \b pr\'eat\b0\par
I am ready (spoken by man) \b je suis pr\'eat\b0\par
I am ready (spoken by woman)\b  je suis pr\'eate\b0\par
he is \b il est\b0\par
he is reading \b il est pr\'eat\b0\par
she is reading\b  elle est pr\'eate\b0\par
to stay\par
(6) 6.44\par
I am staying\par
I'm ready\par
I am eating\par
I am speaking\par
do you speak?\par
are you speaking?\par
to wait\par
you wait \b vous attendez\b0\par
wait a moment!\b  attendez! attendez un moment!\b0\par
you are waiting\par
you are not waiting \b vous n'attendez pas\b0\par
you don't wait\par
why\par
why do you wait?\b  pourquoi attendez-vous?\b0\par
why are you waiting?\par
to leave\par
at what time\par
at what time do you leave? \b\'e0 quelle heure partez-vous?\b0\par
at what time are you leaving?\par
(7) 11.25\par
we, us nous\par
we are leaving \b nous partons\b0\par
you are waiting \par
we are waiting\par
you speak\par
we speak\par
to start \b commencer\b0\par
you are starting \b vous commencez\b0\par
we are starting\b  nous commencons\b0\par
at what time are you starting? \b\'e0 quelle heure commencez-vous?\b0\par
at what time do you start?\par
tomorrow\par
at what time are we starting tomorrow? \b\'e0 quelle heure commencons-nous demain?\b0\par
I am ready\par
I am starting \par
I am not starting\par
he is starting\par
she is starting\par
she is ready\par
she is starting\par
she is not starting\par
she doesn't start\par
it is\par
it is not\par
it, this, that (at beginning of sentence)\b  \'e7a\b0\par
it starts \b\'e7a commence\b0\par
it is ready \b c'est pr\'eat\b0\par
it is starting \b\'e7a commence\b0\par
it is possible\par
it is very important\par
it is very different\par
it is not necessary\par
it is starting\par
it is not ready \b\'e7a n'est pas pr\'eat\b0\par
it is not starting \b\'e7a ne commence pas\b0\par
it doesn't start\par
I can\par
he can \b il peut\b0\par
she can \b elle peut\b0\par
it can start now \b\'e7a peut commencer maintenant\b0\par
it must start now \b\'e7a doit commencer maintenant\b0\par
(8) 5.54\par
(\i many French words can be guessed, such as "arrive" \b arriver\b0\i0 )\par
arrive \b arriver\b0\par
at what time do you arrive tomorrow?\b  \'e0 quelle heure arrivez-vous demain?\b0\par
at what time are you arriving? \b\'e0 quelle heure arrivez-vous?\b0\par
morning \b matin\b0\par
tomorrow morning \b demain matin\b0\par
morning (the whole morning) \b matin\'e9e\b0\par
to spend the whole morning \b passer la matin\'e9e\b0\par
to spend the whole evening \b passer la soir\'e9e\b0\par
good day \b bonjour\b0\par
day \b jour\b0\par
to spend the whole day \b passer la journ\'e9e\b0\par
in, to (a city)\b  \'e0\b0\par
at to (a country) \b en\b0\par
at what time do we arrive in Paris tomorrow morning?\b  \'e0 quelle heure arrivons-nous \'e0 Paris demain matin?\b0\par
I am\par
I am arriving \b j'arrive\b0\par
I am busy\par
I am tired\par
I'm ready\par
I am eating\par
(9) 7.44\par
he is ready \par
he is arriving\par
she is ready\par
she is arriving\par
soon bient\'f4t\par
so long, until soon \b\'e0 bient\'f4t\b0\par
she is arriving soon \b elle arrive bient\'f4t\b0\par
today \b aujourd'hui\b0\par
(\b\i au \b0 is short for \b\'e0 le\b0\i0 )\par
the restaurant \b le restaurant\b0\par
at the restaurant \b au restaurant\b0\par
the office \b le bureau\b0\par
I am at the office \b je suis au bureau\b0\par
not today \b pas aujourd'hui\b0\par
to be \'eatre\par
here \b ici\b0\par
I would like to be here \b je voudrais \'eatre ici\b0\par
I would like to be here with you\b  je voudrais \'eatre ici avec vous\b0\par
at what time are you going to be here? \b\'e0 quelle heure allez-vous \'eatre ici?\b0\par
I have \b j'ai\b0\par
I have something for you \b j'ai quelque chose pour vous\b0\par
I have a message for you\b  j'ai un message pour vous\b0\par
(10) 9.28\par
he has\b  il a\b0\par
he has something for you\b  il a quelque chose pour vous\b0\par
I have\par
I don't have \b je n'ai pas\b0\par
he has\par
he doesn't have \b il n'a pas\b0\par
I am hungry \b j'ai faim\b0\par
I would like to eat something now because I'm hungry \b je voudrais manger quelque chose parce que j'ai faim\b0\par
I am going \b je vais\b0\par
I am going to stay here \b je vais rester ici\b0\par
I'm going to leave soon, I'm not going to stay \b je vais partir bient\'f4t, je ne vais pas rester\b0\par
I'm going to eat \b je vais manger\b0\par
I'm going to start soon \b je vais commencer bient\'f4t\b0\par
I'm not going to leave today\b  je ne vais pas partir aujord'hui\b0\par
I am going \par
I'm not going\par
he is going \b il va\b0\par
I am going to start soon \b je vais commencer bient\'f4t\b0\par
he is going to start soon \b il vous commencer bient\'f4t\b0\par
he is \b il est\b0\par
there\b  l\'e0\b0\par
he is there \b il est l\'e0\b0\par
he is not there \b il n'est pas l\'e0\b0\par
(\b\i il n'est pas l\'e0 \b0 also means "he is not in"\i0 )\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 4 (55.39)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 5.51\par
who \b qui\b0\par
who is there? \b qui est l\'e0?\b0\par
my friend is there \b mon ami est l\'e0\b0\par
everybody is there \b tout le monde est l\'e0\b0\par
nobody \b personne\b0\par
the person \b la personne\b0\par
a person \b une personne\b0\par
nobody is there \b personne est l\'e0\b0\par
(\b\i personne est l\'e0 \b0 also means "nobody is in"\i0 )\par
everybody is ready \par
she is ready\par
he is ready\par
I am going to be ready soon \b je vais \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
he is going to be ready soon \b il va \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
she is going to be ready soon \b elle va \'eatre pr\'eate bient\'f4t\b0\par
who is going to be there tonight \b qui va \'eatre l\'e0 ce soir\b0\par
he is going \par
she is going\par
everybody is going \b tout le monde va\b0\par
nobody is going\b  personne va\b0\par
(2) 3.31\par
all, everything \b tout\b0\par
everything is going \b tout va\b0\par
well \b bien\b0\par
everything is going very well \b tout va tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
nothing \b rien\b0\par
nothing is going \b rien va\b0\par
nothing is going to be ready today\b  rien va \'eatre pr\'eat aujourd'hui\b0\par
he is ready\par
nothing is ready \b rien est pr\'eat\b0\par
who is ready? \b qui est pr\'eat?\b0\par
she is ready\par
he is ready\par
who is ready\par
everybody is ready \b tout le monde est pr\'eat\b0\par
nobody is ready \b personne est pr\'eat\b0\par
everything is ready \b tout est pr\'eat\b0\par
nothing is ready\par
(3) 7.10 \par
is \b est\b0\par
is going \b va\b0\par
I am\par
I am going\par
I'm ready\par
I am going to be ready soon \b je vais \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
he is\par
she is\par
everybody is ready\par
everybody is going to be ready soon \b tout le monde \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
he is going\par
she is going\par
who is going\par
everybody is going\par
nobody is going\par
nothing is going\par
it is going \'e7a va\par
how comment\par
how's it going? \b comment \'e7a va?\b0\par
it is going well \b\'e7a va bien\b0\par
it's going very well \b\'e7a va tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
it's going very well the way it is \b\'e7a va tr\'e8s bien comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is going to be ready soon \b\'e7a va \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
I'm going to be ready soon \b je vais \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
to go\par
you go \par
we are going \b nous allons\b0\par
I am going\par
he is going\par
she is going\par
who is going\par
it is going \par
it is not going \b\'e7a ne va pas\b0\par
it is not going to be ready today \b\'e7a ne va pas \'eatre pr\'eat aujourd'hui\b0\par
but everything is going to be ready for you tomorrow \b mais tout va \'eatre pr\'eat pour vous demain\b0\par
(4) 5.46\par
he can\par
she can\par
who can\par
it can\par
I would like\par
everybody is going to be here \b tout le monde va \'eatre ici\b0\par
everybody must leave soon \b tout le monde doit partir bient\'f4t\b0\par
who speaks English here? \b qui parle anglais ici?\b0\par
I understand \b je comprends\b0\par
I don't understand \b je ne comprends pas\b0\par
he understands \b il comprends\b0\par
nobody understands \b personne comprends\b0\par
everybody understands very well \b tout le monde comprends tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
to leave\par
you are leaving\par
we are leaving\par
I am leaving \b je pars\b0\par
(\i only -er verbs sound the stem in the 1st person singular e.g. \b j'arri\ul v\ulnone e\b0 , compare \b je par\ul s\ulnone\b0\i0 )\par
everybody is leaving \b tout le monde part\b0\par
nobody is leaving\b  personne part\b0\par
to wait\par
I am waiting\b  j'attends\b0\par
everybody is waiting \b tout le monde attends\b0\par
nobody is waiting \b personne attends\b0\par
(5) 4.28\par
to understand\par
to take prendre\par
I am taking \b je prends\b0\par
he is taking \b il prends\b0\par
time \b temps\b0\par
too much time \b trop de temps\b0\par
it is taking too much time \b\'e7a prends trop de temps\b0\par
it doesn't take too much time \b\'e7a prends pas trop de temps\b0\par
it is not taking too much time\par
to sell \b vendre\b0\par
I am selling \b je vends\b0\par
he is selling \b il vends\b0\par
everybody can start now \b tout le monde peut commencer maintenant\b0\par
everybody must start now \b tout le monde doit commencer maintenant\b0\par
(\i there are only three verbs and French which do not conjugate in sound following the first person singular e.g. \b je dois, il doit\b0  etc\i0 )\par
I am \b je suis\b0\par
he is \b il est\b0\par
I have \b j'ai\b0\par
he has \b il a\b0\par
I'm going \b je vais\b0\par
he is going \b il va\b0\par
(6) 3.59\par
will you come with me \b voulez-vous venir avec moi\b0\par
will you come have dinner with me at the house tonight because I would like to speak with you. It is very important \b voulez-vous venir d\'eener avec moi \'e0 la maison ce soir parce que je voudrais parler avec vous. C'est tr\'e8s important pour moi\b0\par
and I would like to know \b et je voudrais savoir\b0\par
at what time you're going to be here \b\'e0 quelle heure vous allez \'eatre ici\b0\par
because I'm going to prepare the dinner for us \b parce que je vais pr\'e9parer le d\'eener pour nous\b0\par
(\i many French verbs can be formed simply by adding \b -er\b0  to an English verb\i0 )\par
(7) 4.09\par
formation \b formation \b0\par
to form \b former\b0\par
to conform \b conformer\b0\par
to confirm \b confirmer\b0\par
will you confirm the reservation for me \b voulez-vous confirmer la r\'e9servation pour moi?\b0\par
to observe \b observer\b0\par
to reserve \b reserver\b0\par
will you reserve a table for two for dinner for tonight \b voulez-vous r\'e9server une table pour deux pour d\'eener pour ce soir\b0\par
to invite \b inviter\b0\par
to consider \b consid\'e9rer \b0\par
to accept \b accepter\b0\par
will you accept the condition \b voulez-vous accepter la condition?\b0\par
to prefer \b pr\'e9f\'e9rer\b0\par
you prefer\b  vous pr\'e9f\'e9rez\b0\par
we prefer \b nous pr\'e9f\'e9rons\b0\par
I prefer \b je pr\'e9f\'e8re\b0\par
(8) 7.57\par
I must speak with you \b je dois parler avec vous\b0\par
he must be here soon \b il doit \'eatre ici bient\'f4t\b0\par
she must be ready now \b elle doit \'eatre pr\'eate ici\b0\par
he must be ready \b il doit \'eatre pr\'eat\b0\par
it must be ready \b\'e7a doit \'eatre pr\'eat maintenant\b0\par
it can be ready \b\'e7a peut \'eatre pr\'eat maintenant\b0\par
maybe, perhaps \b peut-\'eatre\b0\par
(\i so \b peut-\'eatre \b0 literally means "can be"\i0 )\par
perhaps it can be ready now \b peut-\'eatre \'e7a peut \'eatre pr\'eat maintenant\b0\par
it must be ready now \b\'e7a doit \'eatre pr\'eat maintenant\b0\par
I must \b je dois\b0\par
(\b\i -s\b0  is the first person singular ending for \b -ir \b0 and \b -re, \b0 and \b -t \b0  is the ending for 3rd person singular\i0 )\par
to do, make\par
I am doing \b je fais\b0\par
he is doing \b il fait\b0\par
it makes a big difference that way \b\'e7a fait une grande diff\'e9rence comme \'e7a\b0\par
to say, tell \b dire\b0\par
(9) 4.59\par
I say, I tell \b je dis\b0\par
he says \b il dit\b0\par
to see \par
I see\b  je vois\b0\par
he sees \b il voit\b0\par
to know\par
you know \b vous savez\b0\par
we know \b nous savons\b0\par
we don't know \b nous ne savons pas\b0\par
you don't know \b vous ne savez pas\b0\par
do you know? \b savez-vous?\b0\par
do you know where it is? \b savez-vous o\'f9 c'est?\b0\par
I know \b je sais\b0\par
I don't know \b je ne sais pas\b0\par
he knows \b il sait\b0\par
I know where it is \b je sais o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
(10) 7.49\par
nobody knows where it is \b personne sait o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
nobody knows\par
everybody knows where it is \b tout le monde sait o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
who knows? \b qui sait?\b0\par
to have \par
to see\par
you have\par
we have\par
you know \b vous savez\b0\par
you have \b vous avez\b0\par
we know \b nous savons\b0\par
we don't know \b nous ne savons pas\b0\par
you don't know \b vous ne savez pas\b0\par
we have \b nous avons\b0\par
we don't have \b nous n'avons pas\b0\par
you have \b vous avez\b0\par
you don't have \b vous n'avez pas\b0\par
do you have? \b avez-vous?\b0\par
do we have?\b  avons-nous?\b0\par
to have \b avoir\b0\par
to have to \b devoir\b0\par
you must \b vous devez\b0\par
we must \b nous devons\b0\par
we have to leave soon \b nous devons partir bient\'f4t\b0\par
you have to come with me \b vous devez venir avec moi\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\fs20\page\ul\b\fs24 CD 5 (55.30)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 5.12\par
you have to wait \b vous devez attendre\b0\par
he has to wait \b il doit attendre\b0\par
I have to wait \b je dois attendre\b0\par
I'm going to wait here \b je vais attendre ici\b0\par
everybody is going to wait \b tout le monde va attendre\b0\par
nobody can wait \b personne peut attendre\b0\par
can you? \b pouvez-vous?\b0\par
you can \b vous pouvez\b0\par
I would like to know if you can come with me now\b  je voudrais savoir si vous pouvez venir avec moi maintenant\b0\par
(2) 5.45\par
can you wait here? \b pouvez-vous attendre ici?\b0\par
we can \b nous pouvons\b0\par
we cannot wait, we have to leave now\b  nous ne pouvons pas attendre, nous devons partir maintenant\b0\par
you are going\par
we are going \par
I am going\par
he is going\par
she is going\par
everybody is going\par
who is going\par
it is going\par
it is going very well\par
how's it going? \b comment \'e7a va?\b0\par
is it going to be ready soon? \b\'e7a vas \'eatre pr\'eat bient\'f4t\b0\par
to do, make\par
to do it le faire\par
I would like to do it \b je voudrais le faire\b0\par
I must do it \b je dois le faire\b0\par
I am going to do it \b je vais le faire\b0\par
I am not going to do it \b je ne vais pas le faire\b0\par
we are going to do it \b nous allons le faire\b0\par
we are not going to do it now \b nous n'allons pas le faire\b0\par
you are going to do it \b vous allez le faire\b0\par
you are not going to do it \b vous n'allez pas le faire\b0\par
(3) 3.46\par
when \b quand\b0\par
when are you going to do it? \b quand allez-vous le faire?\b0\par
I am going to do it \b je vais le faire\b0\par
I am not going to do it \b je ne vais pas le faire\b0\par
he is going to do it \b il va le faire\b0\par
he is not going to do it \b il ne vas pas le faire\b0\par
because he cannot do it \b parce que il ne peut pas le faire\b0\par
but he must do it \b mais il doit le faire\b0\par
you have to do it\b  vous devez le faire\b0\par
we have to do it \b nous devons le faire\b0\par
I cannot do it now\b  je ne peut pas le faire maintenant\b0\par
can you do it? \b pouvez-vous le faire?\b0\par
we cannot do it \b nous ne pouvons pas le faire\b0\par
(4) 3.46\par
to see\par
I would like to do it \b je voudrais le faire\b0\par
to see\par
to do\par
to do it\par
to see\par
to see it\par
to see it, to see him\b  le voir\b0\par
I am going to see it tonight \b je vais le voir ce soir\b0\par
I am going to see him tonight\par
to understand\par
I cannot understand it\b  je ne peux pas le comprendre\b0\par
I cannot understand him\par
(5) 7.31\par
to take \b prendre\b0\par
I am going to take it \b je vais le prendre\b0\par
to know\par
I would like to know it\b  je voudrais le savoir\b0\par
I must know it \b je dois le savoir\b0\par
to have\par
I would like to have it \b je voudrais l'avoir\b0\par
I must have it today \b je dois l'avoir aujourd'hui\b0\par
when you want to have it? \b quand voulez-vous l'avoir?\b0\par
to buy \b acheter\b0\par
I would like to buy it because I must have it \b je voudrais l'acheter parce que je dois l'avoir\b0\par
will you prepare it for me \b voulez-vous le pr\'e9parer pour moi?\b0\par
will you accept the condition \b voulez-vous accepter la condition?\b0\par
thank you very much \b merci beaucoup\b0\par
many, much, very much \b beaucoup\b0\par
(\i you never say \b tr\'e8s beaucoup\b0  in French\i0 )\par
thanks very much\par
I would like very much to accept the condition\b  je voudrais beaucoup accepter la condition\b0\par
but I'm sorry \par
but I cannot accept it \b mais je ne peux pas l'accepter\b0\par
because it is not acceptable for me that way \b parce que ce n'est pas acceptable pour moi comme \'e7a\b0\par
to see\par
I'm going to see it tonight\b  je vais le voir ce soir\b0\par
I'm going to see him tonight\par
(6) 4.48\par
to see\par
to see it, see him\par
her la\par
to see her \b la voir\b0\par
I'm going to see her tonight \b je vais aller la voir ce soir\b0\par
them \b les\b0\par
to see them \b les voirs\b0\par
to see\par
to see it\par
to see him\par
to see her\par
to see them\par
to see you \b vous voir\b0\par
I would like to see you \b je voudrais vous voir\b0\par
I'm going to see you tonight \b je vais vous voir ce soir\b0\par
I hope\b  j'esp\'e8re \b0\par
to hope \b esp\'e9rer\b0\par
(\i in French, the conjunction "that" is compulsory\i0 )\par
that \b que\b0\par
I hope I'm going to see you \b j'esp\'e8re que je vais vous voir\b0\par
because I would like very much to see you \b parce que je voudrais beaucoup vous voir\b0\par
to see\par
to see it, see him\par
to see him\par
to see them\par
to see you\par
to see us \b nous voir\b0\par
to see me \b me voir\b0\par
can you come see me? \b pouvez-vous venir me voir?\b0\par
(7) 5.05\par
to understand it \b le comprendre\b0\par
to understand him\par
to understand her\par
to understand them\par
to understand you\par
I cannot understand you \b je ne peux pas vous comprendre\b0\par
to understand us \par
to understand me\par
can you understand me? \b pouvez-vous me comprendre?\b0\par
to say, tell\par
to tell it \b le dire\b0\par
to tell you\par
to tell us\par
to tell me\par
I must tell you \b je dois vous dire\b0\par
I am going to tell you later \b je vais vous dire plus tard\b0\par
to find \b trouver\b0\par
we find nous \b trouvons\b0\par
I find \b je trouve\b0\par
would you tell me where it is because I cannot find it \b voulez-vous me dire o\'f9 c'est parce que je ne peux pas le trouver\b0\par
(8) 4.39\par
will you tell me \b voulez-vous me dire\b0\par
can you tell me \b pouvez-vous me dire\b0\par
expensive, dear \b cher\b0\par
it is very expensive \b c'est tr\'e8s cher\b0\par
it is too expensive \b c'est trop cher\b0\par
will you tell me how much it is because I would like to have it and I'm going to buy it if it is not too expensive \b voulez-vous me dire combien c'est parce que je voudrais l'avoir et je vais l'acheter, si ce n'est past trop cher\b0\par
I would like to buy it \b je voudrais l'acheter\b0\par
I am going to buy it \b je vais l'acheter\b0\par
to call appeler\par
to phone t\'e9l\'e9phoner\par
will you call me later \b voulez-vous m'appeler plus tard\b0\par
(9) 4.39\par
can you call me later? \b pouvez-vous m'appeler plus tard?\b0\par
when can you call me? \b quand pouvez-vous m'appeler?\b0\par
when are you going to call me?\b  quand allez-vous m'appeler?\b0\par
I am going to call you later \b je vais vous appelez plus tard\b0\par
will you call me later and can you tell me at what time it is going to be ready, because I must have it today if it is possible \b voulez-vous m'appeler plus tard et pouvez-vous me dire \'e0 quelle heure \'e7a va \'eatre pr\'eat, parce que je dois l'avoir aujourd'hui si c'est possible\b0\par
because I have to have it today \b parce que je dois l'avoir aujourd'hui\b0\par
I cannot understand him \b je ne peux pas le comprendre\b0\par
to wait \b attendre\b0\par
(\b\i attendre\b0  is used like "to await", not "to wait for somebody"\i0 )\par
will you wait for me? \b voulez-vous m'attendre?\b0\par
can you wait for me? \b pouvez-vous m'attendre?\b0\par
I am going to wait for you \b je vais vous attendre\b0\par
I am in a hurry \b je suis press\'e9\b0\par
(10) 6.02\par
I'm sorry but I cannot wait for you because I am very much in a hurry and I have to leave soon \b je regrette mais je ne peut pas vous attendre parce que je suis tr\'e8s press\'e9 et je dois partir bient\'f4t\b0\par
I'm going to see him\b  je vais le voir\b0\par
(\i when him is used in the sense "to him", the French word is not \b le \b0 but \b lui\b0\i0 )\par
to give\par
to carry, wear \b porter\b0\par
to bring \b apporter\b0\par
I'm going to bring you something\b  je vais vous apporter quelque chose\b0\par
the book \b le livre\b0\par
I am going to bring you the book \b je vais vous apporter le livre\b0\par
to send \b envoyer\b0\par
I'm going to send him the book \b je vais lui envoyer le livre\b0\par
I want to send it to him \b je vais le lui envoyer\b0\par
(11) 4.17\par
will you send it to him \b voulez-vous le lui envoyer\b0\par
when can you send it to him? \b quand pouvez-vous le lui envoyer?\b0\par
I'm going to see him tonight and I'm going to give him the book \b je vais le voir ce soir, et je vais lui donner le livre\b0\par
to her \b lui\b0\par
I'm going to see her tonight and I'm going to give her the book \b je vais la voir ce soir, et je vais lui donner le livre\b0\par
to who, to whom \b\'e0 qui?\b0\par
it is for me \b c'est pour moi\b0\par
it is for you\par
it is for us\par
it is for him \b c'est pour lui\b0\par
it is for her \b c'est pour elle \b0\par
(\i note that after \b pour\b0 , we say \b elle \b0 and not \b lui\b0\i0 )\par
with him \b avec lui\b0\par
with her \b avec elle\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 6 (58.49)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 6.16\par
I am going to give it \b je vais le donner\b0\par
I am going to give it to him \b je vais le donner \'e0 lui\b0\par
(\i that is much less ambiguous than \b je vais le lui donner\b0\i0 )\par
I'm going to give it to her \b je vais le donner \'e0 elle\b0\par
I am going to bring him the book \b je vais lui apporter le livre\b0\par
I am going to bring her book \b je vais lui apporter le livre\b0\par
I'm going to bring the book to him \b je vais apporter le livre \'e0 lui\b0\par
I'm going to bring the book to her\b  je vais apporter le livre \'e0 elle\b0\par
to them leur\par
money, silver \b l'argent\b0\par
I'm going to send them the money\b  je vais leur envoyer l'argent\b0\par
my father \b mon p\'e8re\b0\par
my mother \b ma m\'e8re\b0\par
with my father \b avec mon p\'e8re\b0\par
with my mother \b avec me m\'e8re\b0\par
my parents \b mes parents\b0\par
his father \b son p\'e8re\b0\par
his mother \b sa m\'e8re\b0\par
his parents \b ses parents\b0\par
her father \b son p\'e8re\b0\par
her mother\b  sa m\'e8re\b0\par
her parents \b ses parents\b0\par
their \b leur\b0\par
their father \b leur p\'e8re\b0\par
their mother \b leur m\'e8re\b0\par
their parents \b leur parents\b0\par
(2) 3.56\par
(\b\i leur\b0  means "them" and "to them"\i0 )\par
I'm going to bring them their book \b je vais leur apporter leur livre\b0\par
will you tell him, will you say to him \b voulez-vous lui dire?\b0\par
will you tell him that I'm going to call him later \b voulez-vous lui dire que je vais l'appeler plus tard\b0\par
to ask \b demander\b0\par
will you ask him \b voulez-vous lui demander\b0\par
will you ask him if he can wait for me \b voulez-vous lui demander s'il peut m'attendre pour moi\b0\par
(3) 4.53\par
I don't have the time now\b  je n'ai pas le temps maintenant\b0\par
(\i French nouns can be masculine or feminine\i0 )\par
police \b la police\b0\par
army \b une arm\'e9e\b0\par
(\i a few rules about when to use \b le\b0  and when to use \b la\b0 , and how to avoid needing to stop to think about which to use\i0 )\par
(\b\i -ion \b0 words are \b la\b0 , english words ending \b -ty \b0 end in French \b -t\'e9 \b0 and are \b la\b0\i0 )\par
liberty \b la libert\'e9\b0\par
difficulty \b la difficult\'e9\b0\par
facility \b la facilit\'e9\b0\par
possibility \b la possibilit\'e9\b0\par
opportunity \b l'opportunit\'e9\b0\par
speciality \b la specialit\'e9\b0\par
what speciality do you have? \b quelle specialit\'e9 avez-vous?\b0\par
what is the speciality of the house? \b quelle est la specialit\'e9 de la maison?\b0\par
(4) 2.44\par
quality\b  la qualit\'e9\b0\par
what quantity \b quelle quantit\'e9\b0\par
society \b la societ\'e9\b0\par
(\i verbs ending \b -ate\b0  in English end \b -er\b0  in French\i0 )\par
to operate \b op\'e9rer\b0\par
to moderate \b mod\'e9rer\b0\par
to accelerate \b acc\'e9l\'e9rer\b0\par
to facilitate \b faciliter\b0\par
to negotiate \b n\'e9gocier\b0\par
to cooperate \b coop\'e9rer\b0\par
(\i verbs ending \b -fy \b0 in English end \b -fier\b0  in French\i0 )\par
to certify \b certifier\b0\par
to modify \b modifier\b0\par
to justify \b justifier\b0\par
(5) 6.21\par
a \b un, une\b0\par
(\i in spoken French, \b le\b0  and \b la \b0 are contracted to \b l' \b0 and pulled into the preceding word, for example \b je n'ai pas le temps \b0 sounds \b je n'ai parl' temps\b0\i0 )\par
(\i words ending \b -me \b0 are \b le\b0\i0 )\par
problem \b le probl\'e8me\b0\par
system \b le syst\'e8me\b0\par
it's not the problem \b ce n'est pas le probl\'e8me\b0\par
it's not a problem \b ce n'st pas un probl\'e8me\b0\par
there is, there are \b il y a\b0\par
there is a problem here \b il y a un probl\'e8me ici\b0\par
something\par
someone \b quelqu'un\b0\par
there is someone here who would like to speak with you \b il y a quelqu'un ici, qui voudrait parler avec vous\b0\par
is there someone? \b il y a quelqu'un ici?\b0\par
is it that \b est-ce que\b0\par
is there, are there \b est-ce que il y a\b0\par
is there a message for me \b est-ce que il a une message pour moi?\b0\par
(\i plural definite article is \b les\b0\i0 )\par
the books \b les livres\b0\par
(6) 4.30\par
(\i for the plural indefinite article, use des\i0 )\par
messages \b des messages\b0\par
I'm going to buy some books \b je vais acheter des livres\b0\par
flowers \b les fleurs\b0\par
I'm going to buy some flowers \b je vais acheter des fleurs\b0\par
there is a message for you \b il ya a une message pour vous\b0\par
there are messages for you \b il y a des messages pour vous\b0\par
are there any messages for me \b il y a des messages pour moi? est-ce qu'il y a des messages pour moi?\b0\par
is there someone here who speaks English? \b est-ce qu'il y a quelqu'un ici qui parle anglais?\b0\par
(7) 6.13\par
there is nobody here who speaks English \b il n'y a personne ici qui parle anglais\b0\par
not for me pas \b pour moi\b0\par
not now \b pas maintenant\b0\par
no, not any \b pas de...\b0\par
no coffee for me \b pas de caf\'e9 pour moi\b0\par
no problem \b pas de probl\'e8me\b0\par
no cream for me \b pas de cr\'e8me pour moi\b0\par
no sugar for me \b pas de sucre pour moi\b0\par
nobody understands why \b personne comprends pourquoi\b0\par
I don't understand \b je ne comprends pas\b0\par
I understand it \b je le comprends\b0\par
I don't understand it \b je ne le comprends pas\b0\par
(8) 9.51\par
true \b vrai\b0\par
it is true \b c'est vrai\b0\par
it is not true \b ce n'est pas vrai, c'est pas vrai\b0\par
is that so? \b c'est vrai?\b0\par
truly \b vraiment\b0\par
I don't understand \b je ne comprends pas\b0\par
I don't understand it \b je ne le comprends pas\b0\par
I don't understand him \b je ne le comprends pas\b0\par
I don't understand her \b je ne la comprends pas\b0\par
I don't understand them \b je ne les comprends pas\b0\par
I don't understand you \b je ne vous comprends pas\b0\par
he doesn't understand you \b il ne vous comprends pas\b0\par
he doesn't understand us \b il ne nous comprends pas\b0\par
he doesn't understand me \b il ne me comprends pas\b0\par
I understand you very well \b je vous comprends tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
I don't understand you very well \b je ne vous comprends pas tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
nothing\par
I don't understand\par
I don't understand anything \b je ne comprends rien\b0\par
I don't see it \b je ne le vois pas\b0\par
I don't see anything \b je ne le vois rien\b0\par
never \b jamais\b0\par
I never see it \b je ne le vois jamais\b0\par
I never understand why \b je ne comprends jamais pourquoi\b0\par
I can never understand \b je ne peut jamais comprends\b0\par
I cannot understand anything \b je ne peut rien comprendre\b0\par
I would like a glass of mineral water \b je voudrais un verre d'eau minerale\b0\par
I would like a cup of coffee \b je voudrais une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
(9) 9.41\par
(\i when an adjective is followed by a full verb in English, in French you say adjective + \b de\b0  + verb\i0 )\par
it is not possible to do it \b ce n'est pas possible de le faire\b0\par
it is not necessary to do it now \b ce n'est pas necessaire de le faire\b0\par
happy heureux, heureuse\par
I am happy je suis heureux\par
I am happy to do it for you \b je suis heureux de le faire pour vous\b0\par
I am very happy to see you \b je suis tr\'e8s heureux de vous voir\b0\par
I am glad \b je suis content\b0\par
I am very glad to see you\b  je suis tr\'e8s content de vous voir\b0\par
(\i also, in English a noun + infinitive becomes in French noun + \b de \b0 + infinitive\i0 )\par
next time \b la prochaine fois\b0\par
one time, once\b  une fois\b0\par
two times, twice \b deux fois\b0\par
three times\par
the first time \b la premi\'e8re fois\b0\par
the last time \b la derni\'e8re fois\b0\par
once more \b encore une fois\b0\par
I'm going to see it next time\b  je vais le voir la prochaine fois\b0\par
I see it for the first time \b je le voir pour la premi\'e8re fois\b0\par
I would like to have the opportunity to see it next time \b je voudrais avoir l'opportunit\'e9 de le voir la prochaine fois\b0\par
the opportunity to see it \b l'occasion de le voir\b0\par
I don't always have the opportunity to see it \b je n'ai pas toujours l'occasion de le voir\b0\par
I don't always have the time to do it \b je n'ai pas tourjours le temps de le faire\b0\par
it is always a pleasure to see it \b c'est toujour un plaisir de le voir\b0\par
(10) 4.24\par
to take\par
I'm taking it \b je le prends\b0\par
it is taking too much time that way \b\'e7a prends trop de temps comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is making a big difference that way \b\'e7a fait une grande diff\'e9rence comme \'e7a\b0\par
I enjoy, it makes me pleasure \b\'e7a me fait plaisir\b0\par
I'm very pleased to see you \b\'e7a me fait plaisir de vous voir\b0\par
it gives me great pleasure to see you \b\'e7a me fait grand plaisir de vous voir\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 7 (64.08)\par
\ulnone\b0\par
(1) 5.34\par
I'm sorry but I don't have the time to do it now because I am very busy \b je regrette mais je n'ai pas le temps de le faire maintenant parce que je suis tr\'e8s occup\'e9\b0\par
(\b\i de\b0  follows nouns and adjectives, but also some verbs of communication, e.g. \b demander, decider, dire\b0 . If these are themselves are followed by another verb, separate them with \b de\b0\i0 )\par
will you ask him to do it \b voulez-vous lui demander de le faire\b0\par
will you tell him to wait for me\b  voulez-vous lui dire de m'attendre\b0\par
will you ask him to call me later \b voulez-vous lui demander de m'appeler plus tard\b0\par
(\i after any form of "have", a following verb is preceded by \b\'e0\b0\i0 )\par
what, i.e. what is it that \b qu'est-ce que \b0\par
what do you have? \b qu'est-ce que vous avez?\b0\par
do you understand? \b comprenez-vous?, est-ce que vous comprenez\b0\par
do you understand me? \b est-ce que vous me comprenez\b0\par
(2) 5.27\par
what do you have to eat?\b  qu'est-ce que vous avez \'e0 manger\b0\par
you have to eat \b vous devez manger\b0\par
to drink \b boire\b0\par
what do you have to drink? \b qu'est-ce que vous avez \'e0 boire?\b0\par
(\b\i\'e0\b0\i0  \i also used after \b il y a\b0\i0 )\par
what is there to drink? \b qu'est-ce qu'il y a \'e0 boire?\b0\par
what is there to eat? \b qu'est-ce qu'il y a \'e0 manger?\b0\par
(\b\i\'e0 \b0 also used after \b -chose\b0\i0 )\par
I have something to tell you \b j'ai quelque chose \'e0 vous dire\b0\par
(\b\i de\b0  is used after an expression of quantity\i0 )\par
how much time \b combien de temps\b0\par
too much time \b trop de temps\b0\par
(\i any form meaning "much" also means "many"\i0 )\par
many things \b trop de chose\b0\par
much time \b beaucoup de temps\b0\par
I don't have much time \b je n'ai pas baucoup de temps\b0\par
many things \b beaucoup de chose\b0\par
I'm going to buy many things\b  je vais acheter beaucoup de choses\b0\par
too much, too many \b trop\b0\par
I don't have too much time\b  je n'ai pas trop de temps\b0\par
I am not going to buy too many things \b je ne vais pas acheter trop de choses\b0\par
(\i if expressions of quantity are followed by a verb, use \b\'e0\b0\i0 )\par
I have much to do! \b j'ai beaucoup trop \'e0 faire!\b0\par
"nothing doing!" \b "rien \'e0 faire!"\b0\par
(3) 3.57\par
(\i there are several words in French for what, i.e.\i0 )\par
what difference, which difference \b quelle diff\'e9rence\b0\par
what is the difference \b quelle est la diff\'e9rence\b0\par
between \b entre\b0\par
between us \b entre nous\b0\par
between the two, between both \b entre les deux\b0\par
what is the difference between the two? \b quelle est la diff\'e9rence entre les deux?\b0\par
what speciality \b quelle specialit\'e9?\b0\par
what is the speciality of the house? \b quelle est la specialit\'e9 de la maison?\b0\par
what address? \b quelle adresse?\b0\par
your \b votre\b0\par
what is your address? \b quelle est votre adresse?\b0\par
telephone number \b num\'e9ro de t\'e9l\'e9phone\b0\par
what is your telephone number? \b quelle est votre num\'e9ro de t\'e9l\'e9phone?\b0\par
(\i in English you can combine nouns, e.g. "telephone number". In French these nouns are separated by \b de\b0\i0 )\par
what is your name? \b quel est votre nom?\b0\par
(4) 5.07 \par
what difference \b quelle diff\'e9rence\b0\par
what is the difference? \b quelle est la diff\'e9rence?\b0\par
what (followed by a verb) \b que\b0\par
what do you want? \b que voulez-vous?\b0\par
what do you want to eat? \b que voulez-vous manger?\b0\par
what do you want to do now? \b que voulez-vous faire maintenant?\b0\par
what do you want to know? \b que voulez-vous savoir?\b0\par
what do you want? \b que voulez-vous?\b0\par
what do you prefer? \b que pr\'e9f\'e9rez-vous?\b0\par
to think \b penser\b0\par
what do you think? \b que pensez-vous?\b0\par
what do you have? \b que avez-vous?\b0\par
(\b\i que\b0  and \b qu'est-ce que \b0 are interchangeable,in a question followed by a verb, but after \b qu'est-ce que \b0 there is no inversion\i0 )\par
what do you want? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez?\b0\par
what do you know? \b qu'est-ce que vous savez?\b0\par
what do you have for me? \b qu'est-ce que vous avez pour moi?\b0\par
(5) 6.17\par
what do you want? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez?\b0\par
what do you want to say? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
what do you mean? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
(\i what used in the middle of a sentence is \b ce que\b0\i0 )\par
I don't know what I'm going to do today \b je ne sais pas ce que je vais faire aujourd'hui\b0\par
nobody knows what it is \b persone sait ce que c'est\b0\par
who knows? \b qui sait?\b0\par
I don't understand what you mean \b je ne comprendes pas ce que vous voulez dire\b0\par
(6) 7.14\par
(\i there are only two French verbs which take -x in the first person singular\i0 )\par
I can \b je peux\b0\par
he can \b il peut\b0\par
I want \b je veux\b0\par
he wants \b il veut\b0\par
I want it\par
I don't want it\par
that's not what I want \b ce n'est pas ce que je veux\b0\par
that's exactly what I want \b c'est exactement ce que je veux\b0\par
but that's not what I mean \b mais ce n'est pas ce que je veux dire\b0\par
I want to do it \b je veux le faire\b0\par
I'm going to do it \b je vais le faire\b0\par
I'm going to do it because I want to see it \b je vais le faire parce que je veux le voir\b0\par
that's not what I mean \b ce n'est pas ce que je veux dire\b0\par
I don't understand what it means \b je ne comprends pas ce que \'e7a veut dire\b0\par
what does it mean? \b qu'est-ce que \'e7a veut dire?\b0\par
(7) 4.53\par
to explain \b expliquer\b0\par
will you explain to me what you mean \b voulez-vous m'expliquer ce que vous voulez dire\b0\par
(\i the French future tense formed with "going" is more common in French than in English\i0 )\par
I will do it tomorrow\b  je vais le faire demain\b0\par
some, a few \b quel que\b0\par
day \b jour\b0\par
in dans\par
he will be here in a few days\b  il va \'eatre ici dans quel que jours\b0\par
I will arrive tomorrow morning \b je vais arriver demain matin\b0\par
we will arrive tomorrow morning \b nous allons arriver demain matin\b0\par
(\i the other future tense: in early French, there was a form "I to leave have" meaning "I will leave"\i0 )\par
(8) 5.46\par
I will leave tomorrow\b  je partirai demain\b0\par
he will leave tomorrow \b il partira demain\b0\par
you will leave tomorrow \b vous partirez demain\b0\par
we will leave tomorrow \b nous partirons\b0\par
to tell, say\par
I will say, I will tell \b je dirai\b0\par
I will wait\b  j'attendrai\b0\par
you will wait \b vous attendrez\b0\par
we will wait \b nous attendrons\b0\par
he will wait \b il attendra\b0\par
I will understand \b je comprendrai\b0\par
I will not understand it \b je ne le comprendrai pas\b0\par
I won't understand you \b je ne vous comprendrai pas\b0\par
he won't understand me \b il ne me comprendra pas\b0\par
he will tell you\b  il vous dira\b0\par
he won't tell me \b il ne me dira pas\b0\par
I will ask you later \b je vous demanderai plus tard\b0\par
(9) 7.02\par
it will start soon \b\'e7a commencera bient\'f4t\b0\par
it is going to start soon \b\'e7a va commencer bient\'f4t\b0\par
(\i there is a third future tense - use of the present tense to express the future\i0 )\par
it will start tomorrow \b\'e7a commence demain\b0\par
week\b  la semaine\b0\par
next week \b la semaine prochaine\b0\par
I'm going to see you next week \b je vous voir la semaine prochaine, je vais vous voir la semaine\b0  \b prochaine\b0\par
to lift, lift up\b  lever\b0\par
I'm lifting it \b je le leve\b0\par
he is lifting it \b il le leve\b0\par
she is lifting it \b elle le leve\b0\par
I am starting \par
he is starting\par
it is starting\par
one (pronoun) \b on\b0\par
one is starting \b on commence\b0\par
(\b\i on\b0  is often used to express "we"\i0 )\par
are we starting now? \b on commence maintenant?\b0\par
(10) 6.33\par
we are very comfortable here \b on est tr\'e8s confortable ici\b0\par
we are going now \b on va maintenant\b0\par
we are going to stay here \b on va rester ici\b0\par
(\b\i on va\b0  as a question also means "shall we?"\i0 )\par
shall we start? \b on va commencer?\b0\par
shall we leave? \b on va partir?\b0\par
shall we stay? \b on va rester?\b0\par
what shall we...? \b qu'est-ce qu'on va...?\b0\par
what shall we do? \b qu'est-ce qu'on va faire?\b0\par
what shall we eat? \b qu'est-ce qu'on va manger?\b0\par
to order, command \b commander\b0\par
what shall we order? \b qu'est-ce qu'on va commander?\b0\par
what shall we drink?  \b qu'est-ce qu'on va boire?\b0\par
what shall we take?  \b qu'est-ce qu'on va prendre?\b0\par
(\i in English, we "have" food and drinks, in French we "take" food and drinks\i0 )\par
I'm going to have a cup of coffee\b  je vais prendre une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
to have dinner \b d\'eener\b0\par
to have lunch \b d\'e9jeuner\b0\par
lunch \b le d\'e9jeuner\b0\par
will you have lunch with me \b voulez-vous d\'e9jeuner avec moi?\b0\par
breakfast\b  le petit d\'e9jeuner\b0\par
will you have breakfast with me tomorrow morning \b voulez-vous prendre le petit d\'e9jeuner avec moi demain matin\b0\par
(11) \par
I will do it\b  je vais le faire, je le fairai\b0\par
(\i in English, "will you", "will you please" is the only time that "will" does not mean future tense\i0 )\par
will you please, would you please\b  voulez-vous\b0\par
will you come with me \b voulez-vous venir avec moi?\b0\par
do you want to come with me? \b voulez-vous venir avec moi?\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 8 (62.06)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 6.55\par
I'm lifting it \b je le leve\b0\par
I'm lifting myself up, i.e. I'm getting up \b je me leve\b0\par
we are getting up\b  nous nous levons\b0\par
you're getting up \b vous vous levez\b0\par
(\i for "himself", "oneself", "itself" etc use \b se\b0\i0 )\par
he is getting up \b il se leve\b0\par
one is getting up \b on se leve\b0\par
I'm going to get up \b je vais me lever\b0\par
one is going to get up \b on va se lever\b0\par
will you get up please? \b voulez-vous vous lever?\b0\par
at what time are you going to get up tomorrow morning? \b\'e0 quelle heure allez-vous vous levez demain matin\b0\par
to ask\par
I'm asking\par
I'm asking you\par
I am asking myself, I wonder \b je me demande\b0\par
I will call you tomorrow \b je vous appelle demain\b0\par
my name is, I call myself \b je m'appelle \b0\par
(2) 4.12\par
to call back \b rappeler\b0\par
will you call back? \b voulez-vous rappeler?\b0\par
I'm going to call you back \b je vais vous rappeler\b0\par
will you ask him to call me back \b voulez-vous lui dire demander de me rappeler\b0\par
I will call you back later \b je vous rappelle plus tard\b0\par
I remember \b je me rappelle\b0\par
I don't remember \b je ne me rappelle pas\b0\par
to hurry, "despatch oneself" \b se d\'e9pecher\b0\par
I'm hurrying\b  je me d\'e9peche\b0\par
I'm going to hurry \b je vais me d\'e9pecher\b0\par
I must hurry \b je dois me d\'e9pecher\b0\par
one is going to hurry \b on va se d\'e9pecher\b0\par
we are going to hurry \b nous allons nous d\'e9pecher\b0\par
you have to hurry\b  vous devez vous d\'e9pecher\b0\par
will you hurry please \b voulez-vous vous d\'e9pecher\b0\par
(3) 4.30\par
in, to France \b en France\b0\par
in, to England \b en Angleterre\b0\par
in, to Italy \b en Italie\b0\par
in, to Germany \b en Allemagne\b0\par
in, to Switzerland \b en Suisse\b0\par
we are going to Spain \b nous allons en Espagne\b0\par
we are going to be in Spain \b nous allons \'eatre en Espagne\b0\par
in, to California \b en Californie\b0\par
in, to Asia \b en Asie\b0\par
in, to Africa \b en Afrique\b0\par
in, to America \b en Amerique\b0\par
(\i most countries and continents use \b en\b0 , and these are mostly \b la\b0  countries that end in a vowel. Countries ending with a consonant are \b le\b0  countries, and they use \b au \b0 for "in, to"\i0 )\par
in Japan \b au Japon\b0\par
in Switzerland\par
in Denmark\b  au Danemark\b0\par
in Portugal \b au Portugal\b0\par
in Brazil \b au Br\'e9sil\b0\par
in Canada (exception) \b au Canada\b0\par
(\b\i en \b0 is also used for languages\i0 )\par
in French \b en fran\'e7ais\b0\par
one says \b on dit\b0\par
how does one say \b comment dit on\b0\par
how does one say in French? \b comment dit on en fran\'e7ais?\b0\par
how do you say at? \b comment \'e7a se dit?\b0\par
how is it spelled? \b comment \'e7a s'\'e9crit?\b0\par
to write \b\'e9crire\b0\par
it is being written \b\'e7a s'\'e9crit\b0\par
price, prize \b prix\b0\par
what price \b quelle prix\b0\par
what is the price? \b quelle est le prix?\b0\par
it is how much? \b c'est combien\b0\par
will you write it \b voulez-vous l'\'e9crire\b0\par
will you write down the price \b voulez-vous \'e9crire le prix\b0\par
(4) 6.40\par
in English \b en anglais\b0\par
in Spanish \b en espagnol\b0\par
(\b\i en \b0 also used in the construction "while -ing" \b en -ant\b0\i0 )\par
in passing, while passing \b en passant\b0\par
while waiting \b en attendant\b0\par
(\b\i en\i0  \b0\i by itself means "of it", "from it". It replaces the two words \b de \'e7a \b0 "of it". \b en\b0  has the same position as "it". It also means "some of it", "any of it", "some" implying "some of it" or "any" implying "any of it"\i0 )\par
I want \b je veux\b0\par
I want it \b je le veux\b0\par
I want some of it \b j'en veux\b0\par
I don't want any of it \b je n'en veux pas\b0\par
I'm going to buy some \b je vais en acheter\b0\par
because I would like to have some \b parce que je voudrais en avoir\b0\par
do you want to have some? \b voulez-vous en avoir?\b0\par
do you have it?\b  l'avez-vous?, est-ce que vous l'avez?\b0\par
do you have some of it? \b en avez-vous?, est-ce que vous en avez?\b0\par
do you want some of it? \b en voulez-vous?, est-ce que vous en voulez?\b0\par
(5) 6.08\par
enough \b assez\b0\par
I have enough \b j'ai assez\b0\par
I have enough of it \b j'en ai assez\b0\par
(\i that also means "I'm fed up with it"\i0 )\par
I'm really fed up with it! \b j'en ai marre\b0\par
to need \b avoir besoin de\b0\par
I need this book \b j'ai besoin de ce livre\b0\par
I need to do it \b j'ai besoin de le faire\b0\par
one must \b on doit, il faut\b0\par
one must do it \b il faut le faire\b0\par
what you want to do now?\b  qu'est-ce que vous voulez maintenant?\b0\par
if you want \b si vous voulez\b0\par
(\i that also means "It's all right with me"\i0 )\par
(\b\i vous\b0  verbs end \b -ez\b0 , with only three exceptions\i0 )\par
you are \b vous \'eates\b0\par
(6) 5.16\par
where are you? \b o\'f9 \'eates-vous?\b0\par
are you busy?\b  \'eates-vous occup\'e9?\b0\par
free\b  libre\b0\par
are you free? \b\'eates-vous libre?\b0\par
where are you?\par
you are doing, making \b vous faites\b0\par
what are you doing? \b qu'est-ce que vous faites?\b0\par
you are saying, telling\b  vous dites\b0\par
what are you saying? \b qu'est-ce que vous dites?\b0\par
what are you doing? \b qu'est-ce que vous faites?\b0\par
I don't understand what you are saying\b  je ne comprends pas ce que vous dites\b0\par
to hurry\par
I am hurrying\b  je me d\'e9peche\b0\par
I am in a hurry\b  je suis press\'e9\b0\par
I am hurrying because I am in a hurry\b  je me d\'e9peche parce que je sais press\'e9\b0\par
I'm going to hurry \b je vais me d\'e9pecher\b0\par
I must hurry \b je dois me d\'e9pecher\b0\par
will you hurry please \b voulez-vous vous d\'e9pechez\b0\par
hurry yourself! \b d\'e9pechez-vous!\b0\par
(7) 4.39\par
to derange, bother \b d\'e9ranger\b0\par
it bothers me \b\'e7a me d\'e9range\b0\par
it doesn't bother me \b\'e7a me d\'e9range pas\b0\par
it bothers you \b\'e7a vous d\'e9range\b0\par
it bothers me\par
it bothers you? \b\'e7a vous d\'e9range\b0\par
to smoke \b fumer\b0\par
(8) 3.17\par
will it bother you if I smoke? \b\'e7a vous d\'e9range si je fume?\b0\par
information \b information\b0\par
(\b\i information\b0  means "information" in the general sense. For specific information, such as directions to somewhere, use \b renseignements\b0\i0 )\par
to teach \b enseigner\b0\par
to inform \b renseigner\b0\par
to inform oneself, get some information \b se renseigner\b0\par
I'm going to find out \b je vais ne renseigner\b0\par
(9) 6.01\par
(\i now some more handle verbs\i0 )\par
I don't understand you\b  je ne vous comprends pas\b0\par
I cannot understand you \b je ne peut pas vous comprendre\b0\par
I'm not doing it, i.e. I cannot do it now \b je ne peut pas le faire maintenant\b0\par
he isn't doing it \b il ne peut pas le faire\b0\par
do you understand me? \b pouvez-vous me comprendre?\b0\par
why don't you do it now?\b  pourquoi ne pouvez-vous pas le faire maintenant?\b0\par
why don't you tell me? \b pourquoi ne me dites pas?, pourquoi ne pouvez-vous pas me dire?\b0\par
(10) 6.10\par
why don't you come with me now? \b pourquoi ne pouvez-vous pas venir avec moi maintenant?\b0\par
(\i another handle\i0 )\par
I have to leave now \b je dois partir maintenant\b0\par
we must leave now \b on doit partir maintenant\b0\par
(\i another handle\i0 )\par
do you want? \b voulez-vous?\b0\par
why don't you do it, i.e. why don't you want to do it? \b pourquoi ne voulez-vous pas le faire?\b0\par
(\i you can also express the past tense using handles\i0 . \i In English, "can" in past tense is "could". So for "I didn't understand you", you can say "I couldn't understand you"\i0 )\par
I could\b  je pouvais\b0\par
I couldn't understand you \b je ne pouvais pas vous comprendre\b0\par
he didn't wait for us \b il ne pouvait pas nous attendre\b0\par
I had to \b je devais\b0\par
he had to \b il devait\b0\par
he had to leave \b il devait partir\b0\par
he wanted to wait \b il voulait partir\b0\par
I didn't want to buy it\b  je ne voulais pas l'acheter\b0\par
(11) 6.01\par
to know \b savoir\b0\par
I knew\b  je savais\b0\par
I didn't know\b  je ne savais pas\b0\par
to have \b avoir\b0\par
you have \b vous avez\b0\par
I had\b  j'avais\b0\par
I didn't have the time to do it \b je n'avais pas le temps de le faire\b0\par
I was \b j'\'e9tais\b0\par
it was \b c'\'e9tait\b0\par
it wasn't \b ce n'\'e9tait pas\b0\par
it was not possible to do it that way \b ce n'\'e9tait pas possible le faire comme \'e7a\b0\par
because I was very busy \b parce que j'\'e9tait tr\'e8s occup\'e9\b0\par
yesterday evening \b hier soir\b0\par
yesterday morning \b hier matin\b0\par
yesterday afternoon \b hier apr\'e8s-midi\b0\par
I was there last night, but nobody was there \b j'\'e9tais l\'e0 hier soir, mais personne \'e9tait l\'e0\b0\par
I like, I love\b  j'aime\b0\par
I like to do it that way\b  j'aime le faire comme \'e7a\b0\par
(\i but there is a distinction between "I like you" and "I love you" !\i0 )\par
I love you \b je vous aime\b0\par
I like you\b  je vous aime bien\b0\par
I like you but I don't love you \b je vous aime bien mais je ne vous aime pas\b0\par
I love to do it\b  j'adore le faire\b0\par
(12)  2.17\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\fs20\par
}
 