{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deftab1134{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\cf1\lang255\ul\b\f0\fs24 MICHEL THOMAS FRENCH (BUILDER) COURSE, 2 CDs\par
\cf0\lang2057 TRANSCRIPT\par
\ulnone\b0\i\par
This is an approximate transcript of the course, since Michel often changed his mind in the middle of a sentence to be translated, or adapted his sentences for the students. The booklet that accompanied Michel's courses was wholly inadequate, so I have written this transcript. I have found it useful, so maybe other people will, too. \par
\par
Naturally, it would be foolish to try to learn the language using this transcript, without buying the recordings.\par
\par
Note that English is my native language, so I don't guarantee that there are no mistakes. An asterisk denotes a phrase that is highlighted in the booklet which accompanies the recordings. Tracks and track times in the recording are shown in brackets. Page numbers in the booklet are also shown in brackets.\par
\i0\par
\i Version 2, Jan 15th 2006\par
Transcribed by JK\par
\cf1\lang255\i0\par
\ul\b CD 1 (79.18)\ulnone\b0\par
(Track 1, 9.47)\par
*I want... \b Je veux...\par
\b0 I want it \b Je le veux\b0\par
I want that \b Je veux \'e7a\par
\b0 I want to have it \b Je veux l'avoir\b0\par
I want to have that \b Je veux avoir \'e7a\b0\par
*I would like... \b Je voudrais...\b0\par
...to see it/him/her \b ...le/la voir\b0\par
...very much like to see her \b ...beaucoup la voir\b0\par
*I must... \b Je dois...\b0\par
...speak with her/him \b ...parler avec elle/lui\b0\par
...talk to him/her \b ...lui parler\b0\par
*I like, I love... \b J'aime\'85\b0\par
...to do it \b ...le faire\b0\par
\i (You could say \b Je voudrais aller l\'e0 \b0 for "I would like to go there", but it is much better to use \b y\b0 .  \b y\b0  means "to it" or "there" and as a pronoun comes before the verb.  You can push the \b -s\b0  of \b je voudrais\b0  into \b y aller\b0 )\i0\par
I am going to go there \b Je vais y aller\b0\par
I am going there \b J'y vais\b0\par
*sometimes \b *quelquefois\b0\par
once, twice, three times \b une fois, deux fois, trois fois\b0\par
for the first/last time \b pour la premi\'e8re/derni\'e8re fois\b0\par
for the next time \b pour la prochaine fois\b0\par
(p8)\par
I go there sometimes \b J'y vais quelquefois\b0\par
...but not often \b ...mais pas souvent\b0\par
very often / not very often \b tr\'e8s souvent / pas tr\'e8s souvent\b0\par
...but not very often \b ...mais pas tr\'e8s souvent\b0\par
*It's rare \b C'est rare\b0\par
It isn't very interesting \b Ce n'est pas tr\'e8s int\'e9ressant\b0\par
\i (You can push the \b -s\b0  of \b tr\'e8s\b0  into \b int\'e9ressant\b0 )\i0\par
*besides... \b d'ailleurs...\b0\par
...I don't like to do it \b ...je n'aime pas le faire\b0\par
*It is too far \b C'est trop loin\b0\par
It is very far \b C'est tr\'e8s loin\b0\par
It is very far from here \b C'est tr\'e8s loin d'ici\b0\par
And besides, it's too far from here \b Et d'ailleurs, c'est trop loin d'ici\b0\par
Is it far from here? / How far is it from here? \b C'est loin d'ici?\b0\par
It's not far \b Ce n'est pas loin\b0\par
*It is near \b C'est pr\'e8s\b0\par
It is near here (near from here) \b C'est pr\'e8s d'ici\b0\par
*to go on foot / to walk \b aller \'e0 pied\b0\par
You can go on foot / walk \b Vous pouvez aller \'e0 pied\b0\par
It is too far to walk there \b C'est trop loin pour y aller \'e0 pied\b0\par
\i (When "to"in English means "in order to" you use \b pour \b0 followed by the verb)\i0\par
You can take a taxi \b Vous pouvez prendre un taxi\b0\par
One must go there by car (in car) \b On doit y aller en voiture\par
\b0 (p9)\par
\i (You can push the \b t \b0 of \b doit \b0 into \b y aller\b0 )\i0\par
One can / must take a taxi to go there \b On peut / doit prendre un taxi pour y aller\b0\par
(Track 2, 6.49)\par
*It's all right (it goes, it is going) \b\'c7a va\b0\par
It's fine, it's going fine \b C'est bien, \'e7a va bien\b0\par
It's all right that way / like that \b\'c7a va bien comme \'e7a\b0\par
It's better \b C'est mieux\b0\par
It's going better now \b\'c7a va mieux maintenant\b0\par
Everything is going better now \b Tout va mieux maintenant\b0\par
It's going much better that way / like that \b\'c7a va beaucoup mieux comme \'e7a\b0\par
What do you prefer? \b Qu'est-ce que vous pr\'e9f\'e9rez?\b0\par
I prefer it like that \b Je le pr\'e9f\'e8re comme \'e7a\b0\par
I like it... \b Je l'aime\'85\b0\par
...that way \b ...comme \'e7a\b0\par
...better that way \b ...mieux comme \'e7a\b0\par
...much better that way \b ...beaucoup mieux comme \'e7a\b0\par
I don't like to go there now \b Je n'aime pas y aller maintenant\b0\par
*really \b vraiment\b0\par
I don't really like it \b Je ne l'aime pas vraiment\b0\par
I don't really like to go there \b Je n'aime pas vraiment y aller, vraiment je n'aime pas y aller\b0\par
not really \b pas vraiment\b0\par
\i (\b vraiment \b0 means "really" or "truly".  \b vrai \b0 means "true"; \b c'est vrai\b0  means "it's true"; \b Ah vraiment? \b0 means "Is that so?")\i0\par
(p10)\par
*at any rate (in all case)... \b en tout cas...\b0\par
...not tonight \b ...pas ce soir\b0\par
...because I am too tired \b ...parce que je suis trop fatigu\'e9(e)\b0\par
I prefer (to stay) staying here \b Je pr\'e9f\'e8re rester ici\b0\par
I like better staying here \b J'aime mieux rester ici\b0\par
*I don't feel like... \b Je n'ai pas envie de\'85\b0\par
...going out \b ...sortir\b0\par
\i (\b avoir envie de \b0 means "to feel like something".  A noun or an adjective needs \b de \b0 if it is followed by verb)\i0\par
I don't feel like... \b Je n'ai pas envie de\'85\b0\par
...doing it \b ...le faire\b0\par
...seeing it \b ...le voir\b0\par
...staying here \b ...rester ici\b0\par
I don't feel like... \b Je n'ai pas envie d'\'85\b0\par
...going to see it \b ...aller le voir\b0\par
...going there tonight \b ...y aller ce soir\b0\par
I really feel like going to the movies tonight \b J'ai vraiment envie d'aller au cin\'e9ma ce soir\b0\par
I feel like seeing this picture \b J'ai envie de voir ce film\b0\par
I feel like going to see this picture \b J'ai envie d'aller voir ce film\b0\par
*It appears, it seems \b Il para\'eet\b0\par
It appears that it is very interesting \b Il para\'eet que s'est tr\'e8s int\'e9ressant\b0\par
It appears that it is a very interesting picture \b Il para\'eet que c'est un film tr\'e8s int\'e9ressant\b0\par
I feel like seeing it \b J'ai envie de le voir\b0\par
(p11)\par
*It interests me \b\'c7a m'int\'e9resse\b0\par
It interests me very much \b\'c7a m'int\'e9resse beaucoup\b0\par
It doesn't interest me \b\'c7a ne m'int\'e9resse pas\b0\par
*not at all \b pas du tout\b0\par
It doesn't interest me at all \b\'c7a ne m'int\'e9resse pas du tout\b0\par
*I find it, I think it is... \b Je le trouve\'85\b0\par
...very interesting \b ...tr\'e8s int\'e9ressant\b0\par
What do you think? (What is it that you think?)\b  Qu'est-ce que vous pensez?\b0\par
What do you think of it? \b Qu'est-ce que vous en pensez?\b0\par
In my opinion... \b A mon avis\'85\b0\par
...one/we can go there \b ...on peut y aller\b0\par
...we can go there \b ...nous pouvons y aller\b0\par
\i (\b on\b0  meaning "one" is very often used for "we" instead of the \b nous\b0  form)\i0\par
(Track 3, 8.15)\par
*It is worth the trouble \b\'c7a vaut la peine\par
\b0 It is worth doing it \b\'c7a vaut la peine de le faire\b0\par
It is not worth doing it \b\'c7a ne vaut pas la peine de le faire\b0\par
It is not worth going there \b\'c7a ne vaut pas la peine d'y aller\b0\par
\i (For "It's not worth it" you can also say \b Ce n'est pas la peine\b0 )\i0\par
*I think/believe that... \b Je crois que\'85\b0\par
...it's worth it \b\'e7a vaut la peine\b0\par
...it's worth going there to see it \b ...\'e7a vaut la peine d'y aller le voir\b0\par
*perhaps \b peut-\'eatre\b0\par
But perhaps not tonight \b Mais peut-\'eatre pas ce soir\b0\par
Perhaps tomorrow night... \b Peut-\'eatre demain soir\'85\b0\par
(p12)\par
...if you like \b ...si vous voulez\b0\par
...if you feel like doing it \b ...si vous avez envie de le faire\b0\par
\i (You can push the \b z \b0 of \b avez \b0 into \b envie\b0 )\i0\par
*It appeals to me, it pleases me, I like it \b\'c7a me pla\'eet\b0\par
I would like to have it because I like it \b Je voudrais l'avoir parce que \'e7a me pla\'eet\b0\par
It pleases me very much \b\'c7a me pla\'eet beaucoup\b0\par
It pleases you?  Do you like it?  \b\'c7a vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
\i (\b pla\'eet \b0 as in \b s'il vous pla\'eet\b0  meaning "please", literally "if it pleases you")\i0\par
You want it? \b Vous le voulez?\b0\par
Do you want it?  (Is it that you want it?) \b Est-ce que vous le voulez?\b0\par
You want to have it? \b Vous voulez l'avoir?\b0\par
\i (Forming a question: The simplest way of forming a question is to say a statement in a question in tone.  Another easy way is to put \b Est-ce que\'85 \b0 "is it that..." at the beginning of a statement)\i0\par
*You want some of it? \b Vous en voulez?\b0\par
You want to have some of it? \b Vous voulez en avoir?\b0\par
How much of it do you want? \b Combien en voulez-vous?\b0\par
I want some \b J'en veux\b0\par
I don't want any \b Je n'en veux pas\b0\par
I don't want any more of it \b Je n'en veux plus\b0\par
\i (\b en\b0  means "of it"; it is a pronoun and comes before the verb)\i0\par
*too bad, so what \b tant pis\b0\par
\i (\b tant\b0  means "so much", \b pis \b0 means "worse", literally "so much the worse")\i0\par
(p13)\par
*so much the better \b tant mieux\b0\par
so much the better for me \b tant mieux pour moi\b0\par
so much the worse for you \b tant pis pour vous\b0\par
*How much is it? \b Combien c'est? C'est combien?\b0\par
How much is it worth? \b Combien \'e7a vaut?\b0\par
It's not worth much (big thing) \b\'c7a ne vaut pas grand-chose\b0\par
I like it very much \b\'c7a me pla\'eet beaucoup\b0\par
*I must have it \b Je dois l'avoir\b0\par
*How much do I owe you? \b Combien je vous dois?\b0\par
\i (\b Je dois \b0 means both "I must" and "I owe")\i0\par
*I don't like it \b\'c7a ne me pla\'eet pas\b0\par
Do you like it? \b\'c7a vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
Does it appeal to you, do you like it?  (Is it that you like it?) \b Est-ce que \'e7a vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
I don't like doing it \b\'c7a ne me pla\'eet pas de le faire\b0\par
*I am very glad... \b Je suis tr\'e8s content\'85 \par
\b0 *...to see you \b ...de vous voir\b0\par
*I am very happy... \b Je suis tr\'e8s heureux...\b0\par
...to see you \b ...de vous voir\b0\par
...to arrange it for you \b ...de l'arranger pour vous\b0\par
*fortunately, happily \b heureusement\b0\par
Fortunately it will be possible to do it \b Heureusement \'e7a sera possible de le faire\b0\par
(p14)\par
*unfortunately \b malheureusement\b0\par
But unfortunately I can't do it today \b Mais malheureusement je ne peux pas le faire aujourd'hui\b0\par
I cannot do it \b Je ne peux pas le faire\b0\par
I cannot do anything... \b Je ne peux rien faire\'85\b0\par
...but possibly tomorrow \b ...mais possiblement demain\b0\par
*If it is all right with you (if it goes to you) \b Si \'e7a vous va\b0\par
(Track 4, 6.27)\par
*there is, there are... \b Il y a...\b0\par
*There are many people \b Il y a beaucoup de monde\b0\par
\i (\b le monde \b0 means "world", as in \b tout le monde \b0 "everybody", literally "all the world")\i0\par
Everybody is there \b Tout le monde est l\'e0\b0\par
There are too many people \b Il y a trop de monde\b0\par
*There is a message for you \b Il y a un message pour vous\b0\par
There are no messages \b Il n'y a pas de messages\b0\par
Are there any messages? \b Est-ce qu'il y a des messages?\b0\par
*Nothing today \b Rien aujourd'hui\b0\par
Nothing any more \b Plus rien\b0\par
There is nothing any more \b Il n'y a plus rien\b0\par
*I would like to leave a message \b Je voudrais laisser un message\b0\par
Can I leave a message? \b Est-ce que je peux laisser un message? Je peux laisser un message?\b0\par
\i (\b laisser \b0 means "to leave" or "to leave behind")\i0\par
(p15)\par
*I am looking for it... \b Je le cherche\'85\b0\par
...everywhere \b ...partout\b0\par
I see it everywhere \b Je le vois partout\b0\par
I'm looking for it everywhere but... \b Je le cherche partout mais\'85\b0\par
...I cannot find it \b ...je ne peux pas le trouver\b0\par
\i (\b chercher \b0 means "to look for" or "to search", as in \b chercher la femme\b0 , "to look for the woman")\i0\par
*I don't know where it is \b Je ne sais pas o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
*Look!  It's there \b Regardez! C'est l\'e0\b0  \par
It's over there \b C'est l\'e0-bas\b0\par
\i (\b regarder \b0 means "to look"; \b chercher \b0 means "to look for")\i0\par
*I know where it is (emphasising I) \b Moi, je sais o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
\i (Use \b moi\b0  to emphasise "I".  In English, for emphasis, we raise our voice instead)\i0\par
*Will you bring it? \b Voulez-vous l'apporter?\b0\par
Will you bring it to me? \b Voulez-vous me l'apporter?\b0\par
I'm bringing it \b Je l'apporte\b0\par
I'm bringing it to you \b Je vous l'apporte\b0\par
\i (\b apporter \b0 means "to bring"; \b porter\b0  means "to carry" and also "to wear")\i0\par
*of course \b bien s\'fbr\b0\par
*naturally \b naturellement\b0\par
\i (\b aller + chercher \b0 means "to get", so \b je vais le chercher\b0  doesn't mean "I'm going to look for it", but "I'm going to get it".  "I will look for it" is \b je le chercherai\b0 )\i0\par
(p16)\par
*I know where it is and I am going to get it \b Je sais o\'f9 c'est et je vais le chercher\b0\par
*I must hurry (I must dispatch myself) \b Je dois me d\'e9p\'eacher\b0\par
I am going to hurry \b Je vais me d\'e9p\'eacher\b0\par
Will you hurry? \b Voulez-vous vous d\'e9p\'eacher?\b0\par
*I am in a hurry, I am pressed for time \b Je suis press\'e9\b0\par
I'm very much in a hurry \b Je suis tr\'e8s press\'e9\b0\par
I must hurry because... \b Je dois me d\'e9p\'eacher parce que\'85\b0\par
...I am very pressed for time \b ...je suis tr\'e8s press\'e9\b0\par
(Track 5, 13.52)\par
*There is a lot of... \b Il y a beaucoup de\'85\par
\b0 ...traffic \b ...circulation\b0\par
It is going to take a very long time... \b\'c7a va prendre tr\'e8s longtemps\'85\b0\par
...to get there \b ...pour y arriver\b0\par
*late \b en retard\b0\par
I am going to be late \b Je vais \'eatre en retard\b0\par
I will be there late \b Je serai l\'e0 / J'y serai en retard\b0\par
I will be there in a few minutes \b Je serai l\'e0 dans quelques minutes\b0\par
\i (In French there is a difference between "late" meaning "belated" as in \b Je suis en retard \b0 and "late" as in "It is too late" \b C'est trop tard\b0 )\i0\par
*something \b quelque chose\b0\par
Is there something for me? \b Est-ce qu'il y a quelque chose pour moi?\b0\par
No, there isn't anything \b Non, il n'y a rien\b0\par
What do you have for me? \b Qu'est-ce que vous avez pour moi?\b0\par
(p17)\par
*something to... \b quelque chose \'e0\'85\b0\par
Do you have something to eat? \b Est-ce que vous avez quelque chose \'e0 manger?\par
\b0 I have something to tell you \b J'ai quelque chose \'e0 vous dire\b0\par
I have many things to do \b J'ai beaucoup de choses \'e0 faire\b0\par
I have nothing to do now \b Je n'ai rien \'e0 faire maintenant\b0\par
Nothing doing \b Rien \'e0 faire\b0\par
*It doesn't matter (It doesn't do anything)\b  \'c7a ne fait rien\b0\par
It isn't very important to do it \b\'c7a n'est pas tr\'e8s important de le faire\b0\par
It doesn't have much importance \b\'c7a n'a pas beaucoup d'importance\b0\par
*It gives me pleasure (it makes me pleasure) \b\'c7a me fait plaisir\b0\par
I'm very pleased... \b Ca me fait grand plaisir...\b0\par
...to see you \b ...de vous voir\b0\par
...to do it for you \b ...de le faire pour vous\b0\par
It will give me great pleasure to see you, I am looking forward to seeing you \b\'c7a me fera grand plaisir de vous voir\b0\par
I am tired \b Je suis fatigu\'e9\b0\par
I am exhausted \b Je suis \'e9puis\'e9\b0\par
I must rest (I must rest myself) \b Je dois me reposer\b0\par
I am going to have a rest (rest myself) \b Je vais me reposer\b0\par
*There is much noise \b Il y a beaucoup de bruit\b0\par
There is too much noise \b Il y a trop de bruit\b0\par
One is making too much noise \b On fait trop de bruit\b0\par
It makes too much noise \b\'c7a fait trop de bruit\b0\par
It disturbs me (It deranges me) \b\'c7a me d\'e9range\b0\par
(p18)\par
It disturbs me very much \b\'c7a me d\'e9range beaucoup\par
\b0 It doesn't disturb me \b\'c7a ne me d\'e9range pas\b0\par
It doesn't disturb me at all \b\'c7a ne me d\'e9range pas du tout\par
\b0 It annoys me \b\'c7a m'ennuie \b0\par
It doesn't annoy me \b\'c7a ne m'ennuie pas\b0\par
*I have the impression that... \b J'ai l'impression qu'...\b0\par
...she doesn't want it \b ...elle ne le veut pas\b0\par
...she doesn't want to do it \b ...elle ne veut pas le faire\b0\par
I want to do it but I won't do it today... \b Je veux le faire mais je ne le ferai pas aujourd'hui\'85\par
\b0 ...because I am too busy to (in order to) do it today \b ...parce que je suis trop occup\'e9 pour le faire aujourd'hui\b0\par
\i (You can push the \b p \b0 of \b trop\b0  into \b occup\'e9\b0 )\i0\par
*It seems (me) that... \b Il me semble qu'...\b0\par
...she doesn't feel like going there \b ...elle n'a pas envie d'y aller\b0\par
*In my opinion... \b A mon avis\'85\b0\par
 ...I agree (I am in accord) with you \b ...je suis d'accord avec vous\b0\par
It's OK \b C'est d'accord\b0\par
OK, agreed \b D'accord\b0\par
*It interests me a great deal \b\'c7a m'int\'e9resse beaucoup\b0\par
It interests me enormously \b\'c7a m'int\'e9resse \'e9norm\'e9ment\b0\par
But unfortunately it doesn't interest me at all \b Mais malheureusement \'e7a ne m'int\'e9resse pas du tout\b0\par
*I don't think (believe) that... \b Je ne crois pas qu'\'85\b0\par
...he is going to be there this afternoon \b ...il va \'eatre l\'e0 cet apr\'e8s-midi\b0\par
(p19)\par
\i (\b apr\'e8s \b0 means "after" and \b midi\b0  means "mid-day" or "noon"; \b\'e0 midi \b0 means "at noon")\i0\par
*...but we will see \b ...mais on verra\b0\par
I don't know if I can do it but we will see \b Je ne sais pas si je peux le faire mais on verra\b0\par
It won't be possible to do it this way \b Ce ne sera pas possible de le faire comme \'e7a\b0\par
I don't think so, I don't believe it \b Je ne le crois pas\b0\par
I don't think so \b Je ne le pense pas\b0\par
Are you sure? \b\'cates-vous s\'fbr? / Vous \'eates s\'fbr? / Est-ce que vous \'eates s\'fbr? \par
\b0 Of course \b Bien s\'fbr, naturellement\b0\par
Of course I'm sure \b Bien s\'fbr je suis s\'fbr\b0\par
Look! \b Regardez!\b0\par
It's on the table \b C'est sur la table\b0\par
\i (\b s\'fbr \b0 means "sure" and \b sur \b0 means "on")\i0\par
Will you put it... \b Voulez-vous le mettre\'85\b0\par
...under the table? \b ...sous la table?\b0\par
...on the floor (terra, land)? \b ...par terre?\par
\b0 It's on the floor \b C'est par terre\b0\par
I'm going to put it on the floor \b Je vais le mettre par terre\b0\par
Will you put it there on the floor? \b Voulez-vous le mettre l\'e0 par terre?\b0\par
(Track 6, 10.04)\par
*We have to / must go there \b Nous devons y aller, C'est n\'e9cessaire d'y aller\b0\par
*One / we must... \b Il faut\'85\b0\par
...go there now \b ...y aller maintenant\b0\par
...go there right away \b ...y aller tout de suite\b0\par
(p20)\par
\i (You can push the \b t \b0 of \b faut\b0  into the vowel sound at the beginning of \b y aller\b0 )\par
\i0 I would like to have it right away \b Je voudrais l'avoir tout de suite\par
\b0 I must have it straightaway \b Il me faut l'avoir tout de suite, Je dois l'avoir tout de suite\b0\par
*One / We must not...\b  Il ne faut pas\'85\b0\par
...buy it \b ...l'acheter\b0\par
We must not buy it... \b On ne doit pas l'acheter\'85\par
\b0 ...because it's too expensive \b ...parce que c'est trop cher\b0\par
I need this book, that's all \b Il me faut ce livre, c'est tout\b0\par
*That's all (that)... \b C'est tout ce que\'85\b0\par
...I want \b ...je veux\b0\par
...you want \b ...vous voulez\b0\par
That's all I need (all that is necessary to me) \b Oui, c'est tout ce qu'il me faut\b0\par
Do you need anything else? \b Est'ce qu'il vous faut autre chose?\b0\par
No thank you\b  Non merci\b0\par
That will be all \b\'c7a sera tout\b0\par
Will you show me? \b Voulez-vous me montrer?\par
\b0 *Will you let me (made me) see? \b Voulez-vous me faire voir?\b0\par
I am going to show you something else \b Je vais vous faire voir autre chose\b0\par
I can show you something else \b Je peux vous faire voir autre chose\b0\par
Will you show me what you have? \b Voulez-vous me faire voir ce que vous avez?\b0\par
*Will you let me (make me) know? \b Voulez-vous me faire savoir?\b0\par
I will let you (make you) know tomorrow \b Je vous ferai savoir demain\b0\par
(p21)\par
I am going to let you know tomorrow \b Je vais vous faire savoir demain\b0\par
Will you let me know... \b Voulez-vous me faire savoir\'85\b0\par
...at what time it will be ready? \b ...\'e0 quelle heure \'e7a sera pr\'eat?\b0  \par
...at what time it is going to be ready? \b ...\'e0 quelle heure \'e7a va \'eatre pr\'eat?\b0\par
*to find out (to enquire oneself) \b se renseigner\b0\par
to teach \b enseigner\b0\par
enquiries window \b le guichet de renseignements\b0\par
I'm going to find out \b Je vais me renseigner\b0\par
Will you find out? \b Voulez-vous vous renseigner?\par
\b0 I need (I have need of) information \b J'ai besoin d'un renseignement\b0\par
I need some information \b Il me faut des renseignements\b0\par
I must find out... \b Je dois me renseigner...\b0\par
...and I will let you know tomorrow \b ...et je vous ferai savoir demain\b0\par
...and I am going to let you know tomorrow \b ...et je vais vous faire savoir demain\par
\b0 *to be able to \b pouvoir\b0\par
the power \b le pouvoir\b0\par
He does not have the power to do it \b Il n'a pas le pouvoir de le faire\b0\par
He cannot do it \b Il ne peut pas le faire\b0\par
I cannot do it \b Je ne peux pas le faire\b0\par
I am not going to be able to do it \b Je ne vais pas pouvoir le faire\b0\par
I will be able to do it \b Je pourrai le faire\b0\par
I will not be able to do it \b Je ne pourrai pas le faire\b0\par
\i (In the future tense, \b pouvoir \b0 contracts.  Other verbs ending in \b -oir \b0 are similar in the future tense: \b voir (je verrai), savoir (je saurai), devoir (je devrai)\b0  and so on)\i0\par
I won't be able to find it here \b Je ne pourrai pas le trouver ici\b0\par
(p22)\par
*Do you have any (of it)? \b En avez-vous? Est-ce que vous en avez?\b0\par
No, I don't have any (of it) \b Non, je n'en ai pas\b0\par
*There is / are some (of it) \b Il y en a\b0\par
There is / are still some, there is / are still some left \b Il y en a encore\b0\par
I don't have any more (of it) \b Je n'en ai plus \b0\par
There is / are no more (of it) (We're out of it) \b Il n'y en a plus\b0\par
There isn't / aren't any (of it) \b Il n'y en a pas\b0\par
*I'm sorry... \b Je regrette\'85, Je suis d\'e9sol\'e9...\b0\par
...but the aren't any more of it \b ...mais il n'y en a plus\b0\par
(Track 7, 8.13)\par
*How are you?  (How are you going?) \b Comment allez-vous?\b0\par
I'm fine (going well).  And you? \b Je vais bien merci. Et vous?\b0\par
I'm / It's fine, I'm / It's all right \b\'c7a va bien\b0\par
*I get by, I manage, I am managing \b Je me d\'e9brouille\b0\par
I get by in French \b Je me d\'e9brouille en fran\'e7ais\b0\par
I will manage, I will find a way (to do something) \b Je me d\'e9brouillerai\b0\par
I don't know how but... \b Je ne sais pas comment mais\'85\b0\par
...I am going to manage \b ...je vais me d\'e9brouiller\b0\par
\i (You use \b de \b0 after \b demander, dire \b0 and \b decider \b0 if they are followed by a full (infinitive) verb)\i0\par
*I am going to decide to... \b Je vais d\'e9cider de\'85\b0\par
I am going to decide to do it \b Je vais d\'e9cider de le faire\b0\par
I cannot decide to do it \b Je ne peux pas d\'e9cider de le faire\b0\par
(p23)\par
I'm going to ask him / her \b Je vais lui demander\b0\par
I'm going to ask them \b Je vais leur demander\b0\par
I'm going to ask him / her... \b Je vais lui demander\'85\b0\par
...if he can / if she can do it \b ...s'il peut / si elle peut le faire\b0\par
...to come with us \b ...de venir avec nous\b0\par
*I would like to ask you... \b Je voudrais vous demander de\'85\b0\par
...to come with us \b ... venir avec nous\b0\par
*Will you tell him / her... \b Voulez-vous lui dire d'\'85\b0\par
...to wait? \b ...attendre?\b0\par
Will you ask him / her to call me later? \b Voulez-vous lui demander de m'appeler plus tard?\b0\par
I think that he will decide to do it \b Je crois qu'il va d\'e9cider de le faire\b0\par
I am decided / determined to do it immediately \b Je suis d\'e9cid\'e9 de le faire tout de suite\b0\par
to try, to try on \b essayer\b0\par
*I would like... \b Je voudrais\'85\b0\par
I would like to try it on \b Je voudrais l'essayer\b0\par
May I? \b Puis-je...?\b0\par
May I see it? \b Puis-je le voir?\b0\par
Can I see it? \b Est-ce que je peux le voir?\b0\par
Is it all right?  May I?  (You permit?) \b Vous permettez?\b0\par
\i (You use \b de\b0  after \b essayer \b0 and \b oublier \b0 if a verb follows)\i0\par
*I am going to try... \b Je vais essayer de\'85\b0\par
...to do it \b ...le faire\b0\par
I don't know if I can do it... \b Je ne sais pas si je peux le faire\'85\b0\par
...but I am going to try to do it \b ...mais je vais essayer de le faire\b0\par
(p24)\par
*I am not going to forget... \b Je ne vais pas oublier de\'85\b0\par
...to do it \b ...le faire\b0\par
...to tell you \b ...vous dire\b0\par
...to give it to you \b ...vous le donner\b0\par
...to give it to him / her \b ...le lui donner\b0\par
\i (When there are two \b l- \b0 words, as in \b le lui \b0 and \b le leur\b0 , \b le \b0 comes before the pronoun beginning with \b l-\b0 .  When there is only one \b l-\b0  words, all other pronouns such as \b me, te, nous, vous\b0  come before \b le\b0 )\par
\i0 I would like to give it to you \b Je voudrais vous le donner\b0\par
I would like to give it to him / her \b Je voudrais le lui donner\b0\par
I'm not going to forget... \b Je ne vais pas oublier de\'85\b0\par
I won't forget... \b Je n'oublierai pas de\'85\b0\par
...to give it to him / her \b ...le lui donner\b0\par
(Track 8, 5.51)\par
*I really feel like doing it... \b J'ai vraiment envie de le faire\'85\b0\par
...but I don't know if I can do it \b ...mais je ne sais pas si je peux le faire\b0\par
*I will / I am going to try to do it \b J'essayerai / Je vais essayer de le faire\b0\par
She would like to try on the dress \b Elle voudrait essayer la robe\b0\par
He would like to try it on \b Il voudrait l'essayer\b0\par
*Is it worth going there? \b Est-ce que \'e7a vaut la peine d'y aller? \'c7a vaut la peine d'y aller?\b0\par
It's not worth doing it \b\'c7a ne vaut pas la peine de le faire\b0\par
One / We can go there now if you want \b On peut y aller maintenant si vous voulez\b0\par
(p25)\par
\i (You can push the \b t \b0 of \b peut\b0  into \b y aller\b0 )\i0\par
*Will you ask him / her to wait for me? \b Voulez-vous lui demander de m'attendre?\b0\par
Will you tell him / her to wait for me? \b Voulez-vous lui dire de m'attendre?\par
\b0 Will you come with me? Do you want to come with me? \b Voulez-vous venir avec moi?\b0\par
*Yes, certainly \b Oui, certainement\b0\par
*I would like to \b Je voudrais bien\b0\par
I want to \b Je veux bien\b0\par
Agreed, certainly \b D'accord, certainement\b0\par
Gladly \b Volontiers\b0\par
You are very nice \b Vous \'eates tr\'e8s gentil\b0\par
It's very nice of you \b C'est tr\'e8s gentil de votre part\b0\par
*OK?  Is it OK? \b D'accord? C'est d'accord?\b0\par
Does it agree with you? (It goes with you?) Is it OK with you? \b\'c7a vous va?\b0\par
Is it all right with you?  (It convenes with you?) \b\'c7a vous convient?\b0\par
It's all right with me \b\'c7a me convient\b0\par
It's going well \b\'c7a va bien\b0\par
It's not all right with me, it's not convenient for me \b\'c7a ne me convient pas\b0\par
I like that \b J'aime \'e7a\b0\par
It pleases me \b\'c7a me pla\'eet\b0\par
It's a good idea \b C'est une bonne id\'e9e\b0\par
I like that idea \b J'aime cette id\'e9e\b0\par
That is a good idea \b\'c7a c'est une bonne id\'e9e\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 2 (76.06)\ulnone\b0\par
(Track 1, 3.27, p26)\par
*I like... \b J'aime...\b0\par
I like very much... \b J'aime beaucoup\'85\b0\par
I like very much to travel, I very much like travelling \b J'aime beaucoup voyager\b0\par
*to spend time \b passer le temps\b0\par
to spend the weekend \b passer le weekend\b0\par
I think (believe) that I am going to spend my vacation \b Je crois que je vais passer mes vacances\b0\par
...first in France \b ...d'abord en France\b0\par
...and then / later in Italy \b ...et puis / plus tard en Italie\b0\par
*I plan on... \b Je pense\'85\b0\par
\i (\b penser \b0 means "to think" and also "to plan")\i0\par
I plan on leaving (think to leave) soon \b Je pense partir bient\'f4t\b0\par
When do you plan on leaving (think to leave)? \b Quand pensez-vous partir?\b0\par
How long do you plan on staying? \b Combien de temps pensez-vous rester?\b0\par
I plan on leaving Monday \b Je pense partir lundi\b0\par
I plan on leaving next Monday \b Je pense partir lundi prochain\b0\par
\i (Days of the week: Most of the Days of the week are named after Latin and Greek gods and the planets:)\i0\par
(Track 2, 3.46)\par
*Monday \b lundi\b0  \i (moon's day, from \b lune \b0 "moon" and \b dies \b0 "day" in Latin)\i0\par
*Tuesday \b mardi\b0  \i (Mars' day)\i0\par
(p27)\par
next Tuesday, Tuesday morning \b mardi prochain, mardi matin\b0\par
*Wednesday \b mercredi \b0\i (Mercury's day)\i0\par
next Wednesday, Wednesday evening \b mercredi prochain, mercredi soir\b0\par
*Thursday \b jeudi \b0\i (Jove's day)\i0\par
*Friday \b vendredi \b0\i (Venus' day)\i0\par
*Saturday \b samedi \b0\i (sabbath day)\i0\par
*Sunday \b dimanche \b0\i (the Lord's day, from \b dominicus \b0 "of a lord" in Latin)\i0\par
Sunday morning \b dimanche matin\b0\par
\i (Months of the year)\i0\par
*January \b janvier\b0\par
in January, in the month of January \b en janvier, au mois de janvier\b0\par
the next month, next month \b le mois prochain\b0\par
in a month \b dans un mois\b0\par
*February, in the month of February \b f\'e9vrier, au mois de f\'e9vrier\b0\par
*March, April, May, June, July \b mars, avril, mai, juin, juillet\b0\par
*August, September, October \b ao\'fbt, septembre, octobre\b0\par
*November, December \b novembre, d\'e9cembre\b0\par
(Track 3, 3.58)\par
*I plan on... \b Je pense\'85\b0\par
...spending a few weeks in France \b ...passer quelques semaines en France\b0\par
*I expect to, I hope to... \b J'esp\'e8re\'85\b0\par
...spend a few weeks in France \b ...passer quelques semaines en France\b0\par
*I intend to... \b J'ai l'intention de\'85\b0\par
...spend a few weeks in France \b ...passer quelques semaines en France\b0\par
I expect/hope to spend several weeks in France \b J'esp\'e8re passer plusieurs semaines en France\b0\par
(p28)\par
I intend to leave next week \b J'ai l'intention de partir la semaine prochaine\b0\par
I will see you / I'm going to see you... \b Je vous verrai / Je vais vous voir\'85\b0\par
...in a week \b ...dans huit jours\b0\par
eight days ago \b il y a huit jours\b0\par
*I am going to leave... \b Je vais partir\'85\b0\par
...in two weeks / in a fortnight \b ...dans deux semaines / dans quinze jours\b0\par
I am going to / I will see... \b Je vous verrai / Je vais vous voir...\par
\b0 ...in two weeks \b ...dans quinze jours\b0\par
We will arrive in two weeks \b Nous allons arriver dans quinze jours\b0\par
\i (Asking for directions: If you stop a policeman to ask for directions you will say \b Pardon Monsieur\b0 .  Simply say\b  Pour aller \'e0...\b0  "to go to...", the place you want to go to and \b s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0  "please?". Using a questioning tone of voice you can even say just the name and the place and \b s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0 )\i0\par
(Track 4, 4.46)\par
Excuse me... \b Pardon Monsieur/ Madame/Mademoiselle... \b0\par
...(can you tell me) the way to \b ...pour aller \'e0\b0\par
Place de l'Op\'e9ra please? \b ...la Place de l'Op\'e9ra s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
...(can you tell me) the way to Lyon / the road for Lyon? \b ...pour aller \'e0 Lyon s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
*Cross the street... \b Traversez la rue...\b0\par
*...then you continue / keep going straight ahead \b ...puis vous continuez tout droit\b0\par
...turn left \b ...vous tournez \'e0 gauche\b0\par
...turn right \b ...vous tournez \'e0 droite\b0\par
(p29)\par
...at the third street you turn right \b ...\'e0 la troisi\'e8me rue vous tournez \'e0 droite\b0\par
*It is on the right side / to your right \b C'est \'e0 votre droite\b0\par
It is on the left side / to your left \b C'est \'e0 votre gauche\b0\par
\i (Note the difference between \b tout droit \b0 "straight ahead" and \b\'e0 droite \b0 "on the right".  The \b t\b0  is sounded there)\i0\par
*It is right in front \b C'est en face\b0\par
It is on this side \b C'est de ce c\'f4t\'e9\b0\par
*It is on the other side \b C'est de l'autre c\'f4t\'e9\b0\par
I thank you very much \b Je vous remercie beaucoup\b0\par
Thanks a thousand times / many times \b Merci mille fois\b0\par
*It is this way \b C'est par ici\b0\par
You can find it... \b Vous pouvez le trouver\'85\b0\par
...this way \b ...par ici\b0\par
...that way \b ...par l\'e0\b0\par
You will find it that way \b Vous allez le trouver par l\'e0\b0\par
It is that way \b C'est par l\'e0\b0\par
It is at the corner \b C'est au coin\b0\par
It is on the corner of the road \b C'est au coin de la rue\b0\par
It is not far from here, it is on the corner of the street \b Ce n'est pas loin d'ici, c'est au coin de la rue\b0\par
It is at the end of the street \b C'est au bout de la rue\b0\par
It is right there at the end of the street \b C'est tout de suite l\'e0 au bout de la rue\b0\par
It is there, It is over there (there down) \b C'est l\'e0, C'est l\'e0-bas\b0\par
You can find it over there \b Vous pouvez le trouver l\'e0-bas\b0\par
\i (\b aussi...que \b0 means \ldblquote as...as\rdblquote ; \b aussi \b0 by itself means "also"; \b non plus \b0 means "neither")\i0\par
(Track 5, 3.21, p30)\par
Will you ask him... \b Voulez-vous lui demander\'85\b0\par
...to send it to me? \b ...de me l'envoyer?\b0\par
*...as quickly as possible? \b ...aussi vite que possible?\b0\par
I will also do it \b Je le ferai aussi\b0\par
It pleases me also, I like it also \b\'c7a me pla\'eet aussi\b0\par
I don't want it \b Je ne le veux pas\b0\par
I don't want it any more \b Je ne le veux plus\b0\par
Me neither \b Moi non plus\b0\par
*Can you do it as soon as possible? \b Pouvez-vous le faire aussit\'f4t que possible?\b0\par
Can you be here as quickly as possible? \b Pouvez-vous \'eatre ici aussi vite que possible?\b0\par
I am going to arrange it for you as quickly as possible \b Je vais l'arranger pour vous aussi vite que possible\b0\par
*I beg you to... \b Je vous prie de...\b0\par
...do it \b ...le faire\b0\par
...arrange it for me \b ...l'arranger pour moi\b0\par
Will you... \b Voulez-vous\'85\b0\par
...do it please? \b ...le faire s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
...arrange it for me please \b ...l'arranger pour moi s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
Will you come with me... \b Voulez-vous venir avec moi...\b0\par
...please? \b ...s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
...I beg you? \b ...je vous prie?\b0\par
\i (\b Je vous prie\b0 , from \b prier \b0 "to beg" is a more emphatic form of "please")\b  \i0\par
\b0 (Track 6, 7.46)\par
*It is... \b C'est\'85\b0\par
...terrible \b ...terrible\b0\par
...horrible \b ...horrible\b0\par
...awful \b ...affreux\b0\par
(p31)\par
I am going to find out (inform myself) \b Je vais me renseigner\b0\par
I must find out \b Je dois me renseigner\b0\par
I have just found out (I come from finding out) \b Je viens de me renseigner\b0\par
\pard\sl240\slmult1 *Will you try to... \b *Voulez-vous essayer de\'85\par
\b0 ...get it for me? \b ...l'obtenir pour moi?\b0\par
I am going to try to... \b Je vais essayer de\'85\b0\par
...get it for you \b ...l'obtenir pour vous\b0\par
...do it \b ...de le faire\b0\par
I am going to take the plane... \b Je vais prendre l'avion\'85\b0\par
...to go (in order to go) to London \b ...pour aller \'e0 Londres\b0\par
*It works, it functions (it marches) \b\'c7a marche\b0\par
It works well like that \b\'c7a marche bien comme \'e7a\b0\par
*It doesn't work \b\'c7a ne marche pas\b0\par
It doesn't work well \b\'c7a ne marche pas bien\b0\par
\i (Use \b faire \b0 for "to have something done")\i0\par
*I want to get /space have my shirts washed \b Je veux faire laver mes chemises\b0\par
Will you... \b Voulez-vous...\b0\par
...have my suit cleaned (made neat)? \b ...faire nettoyer mon costume?\b0\par
...have the dress cleaned? \b ...faire nettoyer la robe?\b0\par
...have it cleaned? \b ...le faire nettoyer?\b0\par
...have it repaired? \b ...le faire r\'e9parer?\b0\par
...have it washed? \b ...le faire laver?\b0\par
...have it ironed? \b ...le faire repasser?\b0\par
...have him wait, make him wait? \b ...le faire attendre?\b0\par
...have him come up to my room? \b ...le faire monter (dans ma chambre)? \par
\b0 ...have my luggage taken down? \b ...faire descendre mes valises?\b0\par
(p32)\par
...have it taken up? \b ...le faire monter?\b0\par
...have my breakfast brought up? \b ...faire monter mon petit-d\'e9jeuner?\b0\par
...have me awakened / woken up tomorrow morning at eight o'clock? \b ...me faire r\'e9veiller demain matin \'e0 huit heures?\b0\par
...let me know? \b ...me faire savoir?\par
\b0\i (\b monter\b0  means "to go up", "to come up", "to bring up", "to take up", "to carry up" etc; \b descendre \b0 means "to go down", "to bring down", "to take down", "to carry down")\i0\par
I will let you know \b Je vous ferai savoir\b0\par
I am going to let you know \b Je vais vous faire savoir\b0\par
Will you have it changed? \b Voulez-vous le faire changer?\b0\par
Can you show me something else? \b Pouvez-vous me montrer autre chose?\b0\par
Can you show me something else?  (Can you make me see...?) \b Pouvez-vous me faire voir autre chose?\b0\par
*I'm going to have it done (to make it do) \b Je vais le faire faire\b0\par
Will you have it done / made for me? \b Voulez-vous le faire faire pour moi?\b0\par
Will you get (make come) a doctor? \b Voulez-vous faire venir un docteur?\b0\par
Will you get a taxi? \b Voulez-vous faire venir un taxi?\b0\par
Will you call a taxi? \b Voulez-vous appeler un taxi?\b0\par
Will you pass the sugar? \b Voulez-vous passer le sucre?\b0\par
*May I...? \b Puis-je...?\b0\par
May I see it? \b Puis-je le voir?\b0\par
\i (If you are reaching out the something, you will say \b Vous permettez? \b0 "You permit?", "May I?".  Or, if someone says this to you, you will apply \b Je vous prie \b0 "I beg you" or \b Je vous en prie \b0 "I beg you of it", "please do")\i0\par
Will you repair it for me? \b Voulez-vous le r\'e9parer pour moi?\b0\par
Will you have it repaired for me? \b Voulez-vous le faire r\'e9parer pour moi? \b0\par
(Track 7, 7.00, p33)\par
Pardon?  Pardon me?  Excuse me? (When you want someone to repeat something) \b Pardon?\b0\par
Pardon?  Pardon me?  Excuse me? (How?) \b Comment?\b0\par
Will you repeat it, please? (You are saying?) \b Vous dites?\b0\par
I would like to say it... \b Je voudrais le dire\'85\b0\par
...but I don't know how to express it in French \b ...mais je ne sais pas comment l'exprimer en fran\'e7ais\b0\par
I would like to know how to express myself better in French \b Je voudrais savoir comment m'exprimer mieux en fran\'e7ais\b0\par
*How does one say it in French? How do you say it...? (How does it say itself?) \b Comment \'e7a se dit en fran\'e7ais?\b0\par
I would like to know how it is being said in French \b Je voudrais savoir comment \'e7a se dit en fran\'e7ais\b0\par
Will you / Could you tell me how one says it in French? \b Voulez-vous me dire / Pourriez-vous me dire comment \'e7a se dit en fran\'e7ais?\b0\par
*How do you spell it in French? (How does it write itself?) \b Comment \'e7a s'\'e9crit en fran\'e7ais?\par
\b0 I am certain / short that he is going to have a lot of trouble \b Je suis certain / s\'fbr qu'il va avoir beaucoup de difficult\'e9s\b0\par
\i (English words ending in \b -ty\b0 : All English words ending in \b -ty\b0  end in \b -t\'e9 \b0 in French: "liberty" \b libert\'e9\b0 , "opportunity" \b opportunit\'e9\b0 , "facility" \b facilit\'e9\b0 , "difficulty" \b difficult\'e9\b0 . Similarly, English words ending in \b -em\b0  end in \b -\'e8me \b0 in French: "problem" \b probl\'e8me\b0 , "system" \b syst\'e8me\b0 )\i0\par
(p34)\par
One is going to have many problems \b On va avoir beaucoup de probl\'e8mes\b0\par
*to mean \b vouloir dire\b0\par
You mean... (You want to say...) \b Vous voulez dire...\b0\par
*I mean... \b Je veux dire...\b0\par
That's not what I mean \b Ce n'est pas ce que je veux dire\b0\par
What do you mean? (What do you want to say?) \b Qu'est-ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
I don't understand what you mean \b Ce ne comprends pas ce que vous voulez dire\b0\par
*It means... \b\'c7a veut dire...\b0\par
Will you explain what you mean? \b Voulez-vous expliquer ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
Can you explain what that means? \b Pouvez-vous expliquer ce que \'e7a veut dire?\b0\par
*What does it mean? \b Qu'est-ce que \'e7a veut dire?\b0\par
I don't understand what it means \b Je ne comprends pas ce que \'e7a veut dire\b0\par
*Do you want a drink? \b Voulez-vous prendre un verre?\b0\par
Will you have a drink with me? \b Voulez-vous prendre un verre avec moi?\b0\par
As you like \b Comme vous voulez\b0\par
If you like, If you want \b Si vous voulez\b0\par
I don't care (It is equal to me) \b\'c7a m'est \'e9gal\b0\par
It's not worth insisting \b\'c7a ne vaut pas la peine d'insister\b0\par
Why insist?  Don't bother insisting \b Ce n'est pas la peine d'insister\b0\par
*It is evident \b C'est \'e9vident\b0\par
\i (Track 8, 10.20)\par
(English words ending in \b -ly\b0 : To form the equivalent of \b -ly \b0 words in English, in general you simply add \b -ment\b0  to the adjective in French - \b probable, probablement\b0 .  For all words ending in \b -ant \b0 and \b -ent\b0 , such as "evident" and "constant", drop the ending and add \b -amment\b0  or \b -emment\b0 , e.g. \b evidemment, constamment\b0 )\i0\par
*possible, possibly \b possible, possiblement\b0  \i  \i0\par
comfortable, comfortably \b confortable, confortablement\b0\par
evident, evidently \b\'e9vident, \'e9videmment\b0\par
recent, recently \b r\'e9cent, r\'e9cemment\b0\par
constant, constantly \b constant, constamment\b0\par
He is doing it constantly \b Il le fait constamment\b0\par
He is doing the same thing constantly \b Il fait la m\'eame chose constamment\b0\par
not very frequently \b pas tr\'e8s fr\'e9quemment\b0\par
to frequent, to go often to \b fr\'e9quenter\b0\par
I like to frequent this restaurant \b J'aime fr\'e9quenter ce restaurant\b0\par
*It doesn't matter (It doesn't do anything) \b\'c7a ne fait rien\b0\par
It is all the same to me, I don't care \b\'c7a m'est \'e9gal\b0\par
Really, Is that so?  (Truly?) \b Vraiment\b0\par
So much the better \b Tant mieux\b0\par
It's much better that way \b C'est tant mieux comme \'e7a\b0\par
Too bad, So much the worse, So what? \b Tant pis\b0\par
There are no problems \b Il n'y a pas de probl\'e8mes\b0\par
I am angry \b Je suis f\'e2ch\'e9\b0\par
*evening, day, morning \b soir\'e9e, journ\'e9e, matin\'e9e\b0\par
Thank you for that lovely evening \b Merci pour cette agr\'e9able soir\'e9e\b0\par
to give an evening party \b donner une soir\'e9e\b0\par
(p36)\par
It is / was a pleasant (agreeable) evening \b C'est / C'\'e9tait une soir\'e9e agr\'e9able\b0\par
to spend a (whole) day \b passer une journ\'e9e\b0\par
to spend a (whole) morning \b passer une matin\'e9e\b0\par
*together \b ensemble\b0\par
If you want, we can go to the movies together \b Si vous voulez nous pouvons / on peut aller au cin\'e9ma ensemble\b0\par
We can drive there by car \b On peut y aller en voiture\b0\par
It is ridiculous \b C'est ridicule\b0\par
It is too bad \b C'est dommage\b0\par
I thank you \b Je vous remercie\b0\par
*It seems to me that... \b Il me semble que...\b0\par
...everything is all right (is going well) \b ...tout va bien\b0\par
*at least (at less) \b au moins\b0\par
I would like to go there... \b Je voudrais y aller\'85\b0\par
...at least I will see what it is \b ...au moins je verrai ce que c'est\b0\par
*specially \b sp\'e9cialement\b0\par
It is very special \b C'est (tr\'e8s) sp\'e9cial\b0\par
the speciality \b la sp\'e9cialit\'e9\b0\par
What speciality do you have? \b Quelle sp\'e9cialit\'e9 avez-vous?\b0\par
What is the speciality of the house? \b Quelle est la sp\'e9cialit\'e9 de la maison?\b0\par
Especially if you can tell me what you think \b Sp\'e9cialement si vous pouvez me dire ce que vous pensez\b0\par
*Above all / Mainly if you can tell me... \b Surtout si vous pouvez me dire\'85\b0\par
*to reflect, to think about \b r\'e9fl\'e9chir\b0\par
I am going to think about it \b Je vais r\'e9fl\'e9chir\b0\par
Let me think about it \b Laissez-moi r\'e9fl\'e9chir\b0\par
(p37)\par
I am going to let you know in a week \b Je vais vous faire savoir dans huit jours\b0\par
I will let you know... \b Je vous ferai savoir\'85\b0\par
It is going very well \b\'c7a va tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
It is going much better \b\'c7a va beaucoup mieux\b0\par
*to feel \b sentir\b0\par
I feel it \b Je le sens\b0\par
*I feel fine (feel myself) \b Je me sens bien\b0\par
I feel better \b Je me sens mieux\b0\par
I feel much better today \b Je me sens beaucoup mieux aujourd'hui\b0\par
I feel much better when I am alone \b Je me sens beaucoup mieux quand je suis seul\b0\par
I work much better when I am alone \b Je travaille beaucoup mieux quand je suis seul\b0\par
*I don't need / have need of anything \b Je n'ai besoin de rien\b0\par
I don't need / have need of it \b Je n'en ai pas besoin\b0\par
I need / have need of that \b J'ai besoin de \'e7a\b0\par
I need / have need of it \b J'en ai besoin\b0\par
(Track 9, 6.31)\par
*There are too many people here \b Il y a trop de monde ici\b0\par
Everybody is here \b Tout le monde est ici\b0\par
Everybody is going to be here \b Tout le monde va \'eatre ici\b0\par
Everybody is going to be there tonight \b Tout le monde va \'eatre l\'e0 ce soir\b0\par
There are many people \b Il y a beaucoup de monde\b0\par
I don't want to stay here... \b Je ne veux pas rester ici\'85\b0\par
...because there are too many people here \b ...parce qu'il y a trop de monde ici\b0\par
...also it is very warm here \b ...aussi il fait tr\'e8s chaud ici\b0\par
(p38)\par
There is no air-conditioning here \b Il n'y a pas de climatisation ici\b0\par
It is not air-conditioned \b Ce n'est pas climatis\'e9\b0\par
I cannot stand the heat \b Je ne peux pas supporter la chaleur\b0\par
\i (To say "it is..." when you are talking about whether, use \b il fait\'85 \b0 "it makes...", not \b c'est...\b0 )\i0\par
*It is... \b Il fait\'85\b0\par
...warm, hot \b ...chaud\b0\par
...fine, beautiful weather \b beau\par
\b0 ...fine, beautiful weather \b beau\b0  \b temps\b0\par
...cold \b ...froid\b0\par
*to be (to have) cold / warm \b avoir froid / chaud\b0\par
I am (have) warm \b J'ai chaud\b0\par
Are you cold? \b Avez-vous froid?\b0\par
\i (Note: If you say \b\'cates-vous froid?\b0  this means "are you a cold person?")\i0\par
We are warm here \b Nous avons chaud ici\b0\par
It is warm here \b Il fait chaud ici\b0\par
I am cold... \b J'ai froid...\b0\par
...because it is cold here \b ...parce qu'il fait froid ici\b0\par
*to be hungry / thirsty \b avoir faim / soif\b0\par
I am hungry (I have hunger / famine) \b J'ai faim\b0\par
I am not hungry \b Je n'ai pas faim\b0\par
I would like to eat something... \b Je voudrais manger quelque chose\'85\b0\par
...because I am hungry \b ...parce que j'ai faim\b0\par
I am thirsty \b J'ai soif\b0\par
I would like to drink something... \b Je voudrais boire quelque chose\'85\b0\par
...because I am thirsty \b ...parce que j'ai soif\b0\par
What do you want to drink? \b Qu'est-ce que vous voulez boire?\b0\par
(p39)\par
*to take, to have (food or drink) \b prendre\b0\par
What would you like to have (to eat or drink)? \b Qu'est-ce que vous voulez prendre?\b0\par
\i (If you want to say "have" referring to food or drink, never use \b avoir\b0 .  Instead use \b prendre\b0  meaning "to take, intake")\i0\par
I am going to have (take) a cup of coffee \b Je vais prendre une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
I am going to have my breakfast \b Je vais prendre mon petit-d\'e9jeuner\b0\par
Will you have breakfast with me? \b Voulez-vous prendre le petit-d\'e9jeuner avec moi?\b0\par
At what time do you want to have breakfast tomorrow morning? \b\'c0 quelle heure voulez-vous prendre le petit-d\'e9jeuner demain matin?\b0\par
I am going shopping (to do purchases) \b Je vais faire des achats\b0\par
(Track 10, 7.32)\par
*myself \b moi-m\'eame\b0\par
I think I can do it myself \b Je pense/crois que je peux le faire moi-m\'eame\b0\par
I am going to try to do it myself \b Je vais essayer de le faire moi-m\'eame\b0\par
*anyway, even so \b quand m\'eame\b0\par
I am going to do it anyway \b Je vais le faire quand m\'eame\b0\par
I will do it anyway \b Je le ferai quand m\'eame\b0\par
*even if... \b m\'eame si\'85\b0\par
Even if you tell me that I cannot do it... \b M\'eame si vous me dites que je ne peux pas le faire\'85\b0\par
...I am going to try to do it anyway \b ...je vais essayer de le faire quand m\'eame\b0\par
(p40)\par
I am going to do it slowly \b Je vais le faire lentement\b0\par
It is not going very well \b\'c7a ne va pas tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
It is going badly\b  \'c7a va mal\b0\par
It astonishes me, surprises me \b\'c7a m'\'e9tonne\b0\par
I am surprised \b Je suis surpris\b0\par
He is surprised \b Il est surpris\b0\par
*He is quite surprised \b Il est bien surpris\b0\par
\i (\b bien \b0 before an adjective means "quite")\i0\par
*She is surprised \b Elle est surprise\b0\par
Are you surprised? \b\'cates-vous surpris / surprise?\b0\par
\i (If you are talking about a woman, add \b -e \b0 to \b surpris \b0 to make it feminine)\i0\par
*It doesn't surprise me \b\'c7a ne m'\'e9tonne pas\b0\par
*It is... \b C'est...\b0\par
*...magnificent \b ...magnifique\b0\par
...superb \b ...superbe\b0\par
...great \b ...formidable\b0\par
...fantastic, tremendous \b ...fantastique\b0\par
*bad / badly \b mauvais / mal\b0\par
It is very bad \b C'est tr\'e8s mauvais\b0\par
I don't like it because it is very bad \b\'c7a ne me pla\'eet pas parce que c'est tr\'e8s mauvais\b0\par
He is doing it badly \b Il le fait mal\b0\par
It is going badly \b\'c7a va mal\b0\par
It is not going badly today \b\'c7a ne va pas mal aujourd'hui\b0\par
On the contrary, it is going very well \b Au contraire, \'e7a va tr\'e8s bien\b0\par
(p41)\par
*It is very light \b C'est tr\'e8s l\'e9ger\b0\par
It is very heavy \b C'est tr\'e8s lourd\b0\par
It is too heavy \b C'est trop lourd\b0\par
*to lift / to get up \b lever / se lever\b0\par
I am lifting it up \b Je le l\'e8ve\b0\par
I am getting up (lifting myself up) \b Je me l\'e8ve\b0\par
I am going to get up \b Je vais me lever\b0\par
I am going to get up early \b Je vais me lever t\'f4t\b0\par
I am going to get up earlier \b Je vais me lever plus t\'f4t\b0\par
It is too early \b C'est trop t\'f4t\b0\par
I am going to get up early (of good hour) tomorrow morning \b Je vais me lever de bonne heure demain matin\b0\par
*It is very heavy \b C'est tr\'e8s lourd\b0\par
I cannot lift it up... \b Je ne peux pas le lever\'85\b0\par
...because it is too heavy \b ...parce que c'est trop lourd\b0\par
*It is full \b C'est plein\b0\par
It is too full \b C'est trop plein\b0\par
*to fill up / to fill in (a form)\par
Will you fill in the form? \b Voulez-vous remplir la fiche?\b0\par
It is very empty (void) \b C'est tr\'e8s vide\b0\par
It is too empty \b C'est trop vide\b0\par
*to empty \b vider\b0\par
I am going to empty it \b Je vais le vider \b0\par
Will you fill up the glass? \b Voulez-vous remplir le verre?\b0\par
Will you fill up the bottle? \b Voulez-vous remplir la bouteille?\par
\b0 It is not clean \b Ce n'est pas propre\b0\par
Will you clean it up? \b Voulez-vous le nettoyer?\b0\par
It is very dirty \b C'est tr\'e8s sale\b0\par
It is too dirty \b C'est trop sale\b0\par
(Track 11, 6.50, p42)\par
*to answer (respond) \b r\'e9pondre\b0\par
to give an answer \b donner une r\'e9ponse\b0\par
Will you give me an answer? \b Voulez-vous me donner une r\'e9ponse?\b0\par
I am waiting for your answer \b J'attends votre r\'e9ponse\b0\par
Will you answer me? \b Voulez-vous me r\'e9pondre?\b0\par
It is perfect \b C'est parfait\b0\par
It is really perfect \b C'est vraiment parfait\b0\par
Where do you want to put it? \b O\'f9 voulez-vous le mettre?\b0\par
I would like to know where it is \b Je voudrais savoir o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
*It is (finds itself)... \b\'c7a se trouve\'85\b0\par
I would like to know where it is located \b Je voudrais savoir o\'f9 \'e7a se trouve\b0\par
I would like to know where is the restaurant \b Je voudrais savoir o\'f9 est / se trouve le restaurant\b0\par
The restaurant is near here \b Le restaurant est / se trouve pr\'e8s d'ici\b0\par
The restaurant is quite near here \b Le restaurant se trouve tout pr\'e8s d'ici\b0\par
You can walk there \b Vous pouvez aller \'e0 pied\b0\par
It is not far \b Ce n'est pas loin\b0\par
*anyway, any place, no matter where \b n'importe o\'f9\b0\par
You can get it anywhere \b Vous pouvez l'avoir n'importe o\'f9\b0\par
You can find it anyplace \b Vous pouvez le trouver n'importe o\'f9\b0\par
*anybody \b n'importe qui\b0\par
Anybody can tell you \b N'importe qui peut vous dire\b0\par
*any time, no matter when \b n'importe quand\b0\par
You can come any time \b Vous pouvez venir n'importe quand\b0\par
*at any time \b\'e0 n'importe quelle heure\b0\par
You can come at any time \b Vous pouvez venir \'e0 n'importe quelle heure\b0\par
(p43)\par
You can do it at any time / no matter when \b Vous pouvez le faire \'e0 n'importe quelle heure / n'importe quand\b0\par
anyhow, no matter how \b n'importe comment\b0\par
*I am looking for it everywhere... \b Je le cherche partout...\b0\par
...but you can find it anyplace \b ...mais vous pouvez le trouver n'importe o\'f9\b0\par
*without \b sans\b0\par
I can't do it without you \b Je ne peux pas le faire sans vous\b0\par
without worries \b sans souci\b0\par
without... \b sans...\b0\par
...telling me \b ...me dire\b0\par
...finding it \b ...le trouver\b0\par
...leaving \b ...partir\b0\par
...saying a word \b ...dire un mot\b0\par
He is going to leave without saying a word \b Il va partir sans dire un mot\b0\par
\i (For verbs in English which end in \b -ing\b0  such as "doing", "making" says and which follow a preposition such as \b sans\b0 , you use the whole infinitive verb in French)\i0\par
*It is enough \b C'est assez\b0\par
*It / That is enough (It suffices) \b\'c7a suffit\b0\par
It is enough for today \b\'c7a suffit pour aujourd'hui\b0\par
It is enough like that \b C'est assez comme \'e7a\b0\par
Good trip! \b Bon voyage!\b0\par
Good luck! \b Bonne chance!\b0\par
*to wish \b souhaiter\b0\par
I wish you good luck \b Je vous souhaite bonne chance\b0\par
to your wishes (said after sneezing) \b\'c0 vos souhaits\b0\par
until soon \b\'c0 bient\'f4t\b0\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
}
 