{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deftab1134{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\cf1\lang255\ul\b\f0\fs24 MICHEL THOMAS FRENCH (ADVANCED) COURSE, 4 CDs\par
\cf0\lang2057 TRANSCRIPT\par
\ulnone\b0\i\par
This is an approximate transcript of the course, since Michel often changed his mind in the middle of a sentence to be translated, or adapted his sentences for the students. The booklet that accompanied Michel's courses was wholly inadequate, so I have written this transcript. I have found it useful, so maybe other people will, too. \par
\par
Naturally, it would be foolish to try to learn the language using this transcript, without buying the recordings.\par
\par
Note that English is my native language, so I don't guarantee that there are no mistakes. Tracks and track times in the recording are shown in brackets. \par
\i0\par
\i Version 2, Jan 15th 2006\par
Transcribed by JK\par
\cf1\lang255\i0\par
\ul\b CD 1 (75.26)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 3.46\par
I want it now \b je le veut maintenant\b0\par
I don't want them \b je ne les veux pas\b0\par
do you want it? le voulez-vous?, est-ce que vous le voulez?\par
why do you want it now?\b  pourquoi le voulez-vous maintenant?\b0\par
why don't you want it now? \b pourquoi ne le voulez-vous pas maintenant?\b0\par
(2) 2.52\par
I don't know where it is\b  je ne sais pas o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
I don't know what it is \b je ne sais pas ce que c'est\b0\par
to explain \b\'e9xpliquer\b0\par
can you explain to me what it is?\b  pouvez-vous m'\'e9xpliquer ce que c'est?\b0\par
what do you want? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez?\b0\par
what do you want to do? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez faire?\b0\par
what do you want to say? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
what do you mean?\b  qu'est-ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
I don't understand what you mean\b  je ne comprends pas ce que vous voulez dire\b0\par
can explain to me what you mean? \b pouvez-vous m'\'e9xpliquer ce que vous voulez dire?\b0\par
that's not what I mean \b ce n'est pas ce que je veux dire\b0\par
what do you mean? \b qu'est-ce que vous-voulez dire?\b0\par
it means \b\'e7a veut dire\b0\par
what does it mean?\b  qu'est-ce que \'e7a veut dire?\b0\par
I don't understand what it means\b  je ne comprends pas ce que \'e7a veut dire\b0\par
I want\par
I'm going\par
I want it\par
I don't want it\par
I want some, I want some of it \b j'en veux\b0\par
I don't want any\b  je n'en veux pas\b0\par
that's not what I mean \b ce n'est pas ce que je veux dire\b0\par
I don't know what it means\b  je ne suis pas ce que \'e7a veut dire\b0\par
(3) 4.00\par
there are many people here \b il y a beaucoup de monde ici\b0\par
(\b\i monde \b0 is used in a general sense for "a lot of people"\i0 )\par
everybody knows where it is \b tout le monde sait o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
nobody knows where it is, nobody can find it\b  personne sait o\'f9 c'est, personne peut le trouver\b0\par
but everybody wants to see it \b mais tout le monde veut le voir\b0\par
I have it\par
I don't have it\par
I want it\par
I don't want it\par
I want them\par
I don't want them\par
I don't want anything\b  je ne veux rien\b0\par
I don't want it\par
I don't want any of it \b je n'en veux pas\b0\par
I don't want it\par
I don't want them\par
I don't want any\b  je n'en veux pas\b0\par
(4) 2.03\par
I don't understand it \b je ne le comprends pas\b0\par
I don't understand anything \b je ne comprends rien\b0\par
never\par
I never understand what he wants \b je ne comprends jamais ce que il veut\b0\par
I never know\b  je ne sais jamais\b0\par
I know\par
I don't know\par
I don't know anything\par
I never know\par
("\i not...any more" is \b ne...plus\b0\i0 )\par
I don't know any more\b  je ne sais plus\b0\par
I don't understand him any more \b je ne le comprends plus\b0\par
(5) 4.45\par
I'm going to see it\b  je vais le voir\b0\par
to it, there\b  y\b0\par
I'm going there\b  j'y vais\b0\par
I would like to go there \b je voudrais y aller\b0\par
but I cannot go there now mais\b  je n'y peut pas y aller maintenant\b0\par
because I'm busy parce que \b je suis occup\'e9\b0\par
I'm very busy now \b je suis tr\'e8s occup\'e9 maintenant\b0\par
I would like to go there \b je voudrais y aller\b0\par
with you\par
with him\par
with her\par
with them \b avec eux\b0\par
I'm going to see him tonight and I'm going to give him his book \b je vais le voir ce soir et je vais lui donner son livre\b0\par
I'm going to see her tonight and I'm going to give her her book\b  je vais la voir ce soir et je vais lui donner son livre\b0\par
I'm going to tell him \b je vais lui dire\b0\par
I'm going to tell her\b  je vais lui dire\b0\par
Will you tell him \b voulez-vous lui dire?\b0\par
can you tell her? \b pouvez-vous lui dire?\b0\par
to them \b leur\b0\par
will you tell them \b voulez-vous leur dire\b0\par
Will you give them the book \b voulez-vous leur donner le livre\b0\par
(6) 0.52\par
the book \b le livre\b0\par
the pound \b la livre\b0\par
(7) 2.51\par
to them\b  leur\b0\par
their\b  leur\b0\par
to bring\b  apporter\b0\par
Will you bring them their book \b voulez-vous leur apporter leur livre\b0\par
I'm going to send him the money \b je vais lui envoyer l'argent\b0\par
I'm going to send her the money\b  je vais lui envoyer l'argent\b0\par
I'm going to send them money\b  je vais leur envoyer l'argent\b0\par
I'm going to send the money to him\b  je vais envoyer l'argent \'e0 lui\b0\par
I'm going to send the money to her \b je vais envoyer l'argent \'e0 elle\b0\par
I'm going to send the money to them\b  je vais envoyer l'argent \'e0 eux\b0\par
(8) 6.20\par
I'm going to send it to him \b je vais le lui envoyer\b0\par
I'm going to send it to her \b je vais le lui envoyer\b0\par
(\i if you have two pronouns that both begin with \b l- \b0 then \b le, la\b0  always comes before \b lui, leur\b0 . Any pronouns that don't begin \b l-\b0  come first, such as \b vous le \b0 "it  - to you"\i0\par
I'm going to send it to you \b je vais vous l'envoyer\b0\par
I'm going to send it to him \b je vais le lui envoyer\b0\par
I'm going to send them to her \b je vais les lui envoyer\b0\par
I'm going to send them\i  to her\b\i0  je vais les envoyer \'e0 elle\b0\par
I'm going to send them to Paris \b je vais les envoyer \'e0 Paris\b0\par
I'm going to write a letter to them \b je vais leur \'e9crire une lettre\b0\par
I'm going to send themo her\par
I'm going to send them to him\par
I'm going to send them to them\par
will you send it to me \b voulez-vous me l'envoyer, voulez-vous l'envoyer \'e0 moi\b0\par
I cannot tell it to you now because I don't know it\b  je ne peux pas vous le dire maintenant parce que je ne le sais pas\b0\par
(9) 3.38\par
(\i verbs are in four groups, ending \b -er, -ir, -re, -oir\b0\i0 )\par
the power \b le pouvoir\b0\par
the duty \b le devoir\b0\par
that is your duty \b c'est votre devoir\b0\par
homework \b les devoirs\b0\par
(\i eighty percent of verbs end \b -er\b0 . Verbs can be thought of as belonging to two groups: \b -er\b0  verbs and non -\b er \b0 verbs\b\i0 )\b0\par
(10) 3.48\par
(\i we'll talk now about \b -er\b0  verbs\i0 )\par
to speak\par
(\i we can think of conjugated verbs belonging to two boxes, a long and short box. The long box consists of "we" and "you"\i0 )\par
you speak \b vous parlez\b0\par
we speak \b nous parlons\b0\par
(\i all others are in the short box. Cut off the \b -r\b0  from the infinitive. They all sound the same, and the final consonant is sounded e.g. \b je parle, il parle\b0\i0 )\par
I speak \b je parle\b0\par
I am ready \b je suis pr\'eat\b0\par
I am eating\b  je mange\b0\par
I don't speak\b  je ne parle pas\b0\par
to stay\par
we are staying \b nous restons\b0\par
you are staying \b vous restez\b0\par
how long are you staying? \b combien de temps restez-vous?\b0\par
how long are we staying?\b  combien de temps restons-nous?\b0\par
(11) 1.19\par
(\i for the imperative, just drop \b vous\b0\i0 )\par
stay! \b restez!, restez ici!\b0\par
don't stay! \b ne restez pas!\b0\par
we are staying\par
(\i for \ldblquote let's\rdblquote  imperative, just drop \b nous\b0\i0 )\par
let's stay! \b restons!\b0\par
let's stay here! \b restons ici!\b0\par
let's speak French! \b parlons fran\'e7ais!\b0\par
speak French with me! \b parlez fran\'e7ais!\b0\par
don't speak English now! \b ne parlez pas anglais maintenant\b0\par
(12) 4.01\par
I'm staying\par
I'm not staying\par
everybody is staying \b tout le monde reste\b0\par
nobody is staying \b personne reste\b0\par
my friend is staying \b mon ami reste\b0\par
it is ready \b c'est pr\'eat\b0\par
it is staying \b\'e7a reste\b0\par
it is not staying \b\'e7a ne reste pas\b0\par
he is staying \b il reste\b0\par
they are staying \b ils restent\b0\par
(\b\i -ent \b0 is silent as the verb ending for "they"\i0 )\par
it is special \b c'est sp\'e9cial\b0\par
specially \b sp\'e9cialement\b0\par
normal\par
normally\par
possible\par
possibly\par
certain \b certain\b0\par
certain \b certainment\b0\par
(\i for \b -ent \b0 and \b -ant \b0 words, you must contract\i0 )\par
evident \b\'e9vident \b0\par
evidently \b\'e9videmment\b0\par
constant \b constant\b0\par
constantly \b constamment\b0\par
(13) 6.57\par
to begin\par
we are starting\par
let's start!\par
at what time are we starting? \par
at what time are you starting?\par
start now!\par
don't start now! Start a little later! \b ne commencez pas maintenant! Commencez un peu plus tard!\b0\par
I don't understand\par
I don't understand anything\par
I don't understand any more\b  je ne comprends plus\b0\par
it is ready\par
it is starting now\par
everybody is starting\par
my friend is starting\par
my friends \b mes ami\b0\par
my friends are starting \b mes ami commencent\b0\par
my friends are arriving tonight \b mes ami arrivent ce soir\b0\par
to leave\par
we are leaving\par
let's leave!\par
at what time are you leaving?\par
at what time are we leaving?\par
don't leave\par
to prepare \b pr\'e9parer\b0\par
he is preparing it\b  il le pr\'e9pare\b0\par
they are preparing it \b ils les pr\'e9parent\b0\par
he is not accepting it \b il ne l'accepte pas\b0\par
he doesn't accept the condition\b  il n'accepte pas la condition\b0\par
everybody is ready\par
everybody is starting\par
my friends are starting \b mes amis commencent\b0\par
my friends are arriving \b mes amis arrivent\b0\par
my friends are leaving \b mes amis partent\b0\par
they are leaving \b ils partent\b0\par
to sell \b vendre\b0\par
they are selling it \b ils le vendent\b0\par
to wait \b attendre\b0\par
they are waiting \b ils attendent\b0\par
they are waiting for me \b ils m'attendent\b0\par
my friends are waiting for me \b mes amis m'attendent\b0\par
wait! Wait a moment! \b attendez! attendez un moment!\b0\par
let's wait here! \b attendons ici!\b0\par
don't wait! \b n'attendez pas!\b0\par
they are waiting for you \b ils vous attendent\b0\par
(14) 3.50\par
(\i For non \b -er \b0 verbs: don't sound the final consonant of the infinitive stem in the short box, except for "they" forms\i0 )\par
I am waiting \b j'attends\b0\par
he is waiting\b  il attend\b0\par
they are waiting \b ils attendent\b0\par
everybody is leaving \b tout le monde part\b0\par
I'm leaving\b  je pars\b0\par
they are leaving \b ils partent\b0\par
to sleep\par
I'm sleeping\b  je dors\b0\par
he is sleeping\b  il dort\b0\par
everybody is sleeping \b tout le monde dort\b0\par
my friends are sleeping \b mes amis dorment\b0\par
she is sleeping \b elle dort\b0\par
to serve \b servir\b0\par
he is serving the dinner\b  il sert le d\'eener\b0\par
they are serving the dinner at seven o'clock \b ils servent le d\'eener \'e0 sept heures\b0\par
one is serving the dinner at seven o'clock \b on sert le d\'eener \'e0 sept heures\b0\par
(15) 2.16\par
dinner is being served at seven o'clock \b on sert le d\'eener \'e0 sept heures\b0\par
we are very comfortable here \b on est tr\'e8s confortable ici, nous sommes tr\'e8s confortable ici\b0\par
we are leaving soon \b on part bient\'f4t, nous partons bient\'f4t\b0\par
we are going to leave soon \b on va partir bient\'f4t, nous allons partir bient\'f4t\b0\par
(16) 1.11\par
we are going to start soon \b on va commencer bient\'f4t, nous allons commencer bient\'f4t, on commence bient\'f4t, nous commencons bient\'f4t\b0\par
we can start now \b on peut commencer maintenant; nous pouvons commencer maintenant\b0\par
we must start on \b doit commencer; nous devons commencer\b0\par
(17) 1.31\par
to feel\b  sentir\b0\par
I feel it  \b je le sens\b0\par
they feel it\b  ils le sentent\b0\par
he feels it \b il le sent\b0\par
(\i to make a distinction in French between "I feel something" and "I feel fine", "I don't feel well" use "I myself feel"\i0 )\par
I feel fine \b je me sens bien\b0\par
I don't feel fine \b je ne me sens pas bien\b0\par
(18) 3.29\par
better \b mieux\b0\par
I feel better \b je me sens mieux\b0\par
(\i note comparitive and superlative: good-better-best is \b bon-meilleur-le meilleur \b0 but well-better-best is \b bien-mieux-le mieux\b0\i0 )\par
this wine is better than the other \b ce vin et meilleur que l'autre\b0\par
it is the best wine of the house \b c'est le meilleur vin de la maison\b0\par
I feel fine \b je me sens bien\b0\par
I feel better \b je me sens mieux maintenant\b0\par
I feel much better now \b je me sens beaucoup mieux maintenant\b0\par
(\b\i sentir bon \b0 means "to smell", not "to feel good"\i0 )\par
it smells good \b\'e7a sent bon\b0\par
(19) 1.38\par
I'm sleeping\b  je dors\b0\par
he is sleeping \b il dort\b0\par
one is sleeping \b on dort\b0\par
they are sleeping \b ils dorment\b0\par
(\i for \b -er\b0  verbs, you drop the \b -r \b0 from the infinitive in the short box to leave \b -e, \b0 or \b -ent \b0 for "they". For non \b -er\b0  verbs, the short box is \b je --s, il --t, ils --ent\b0\i0 )\par
to do\par
I'm doing \b je fais\b0\par
I'm not doing it \b je ne le fais pas\b0\par
he is doing it \b il le fait\b0\par
one is doing it \b on le fait\b0\par
one is not doing it that way \b on ne le fait pas comme \'e7a\b0\par
(\i that also means "it is not being done that way"\i0 )\par
(20) 1.25\par
it is making a big difference that way \b\'e7a fait une grande diff\'e9rence comme \'e7a\b0\par
(\i english nouns ending \b -ence\b0  are the same in French, and are \b la\b0\i0 )\par
it doesn't make much difference \b\'e7a ne fait pas beaucoup de diff\'e9rence\b0\par
how much time \b combien de temps\b0\par
I don't have much time \b je n'ai pas beaucoup de temps\b0\par
(21) 2.20\par
it is too late \b c'est trop tard\b0\par
you're going too fast \b vous allez trop vite\b0\par
it is too much \b c'est trop\b0\par
to work \b travailler\b0\par
he is working too much\b  il travaille trop\b0\par
to take \b prendre\b0\par
it is taking too much time \b\'e7a prend trop de temps\b0\par
it is taking too much time like that \b\'e7a prend beaucoup trop te temps comme \'e7a\b0\par
it is much too much\b  c'est beaucoup trop\b0\par
it is much too much for me\b  c'est baucoup trop pour moi\b0\par
it is taking much too much time that way \par
(22) 1.40\par
I'm taking it \b je le prends\b0\par
he is taking \b il le prend\b0\par
(\i it is not spelled \b prendt\b0  because \b -t\b0  is not added to a "d" or "t"\i0 )\par
he doesn't understand me\b  il ne me comprend pas\b0\par
everybody is waiting for me\b  tout le monde m'attend\b0\par
my friends are waiting for me \b mes amis m'attendent\b0\par
(23) 1.55\par
(\i for \b -ir\b0  verbs, in the short box, you drop the consonant that you don't sound. The endings are still \b -s \b0  and \b -t\b0 , though\i0 )\par
I am sleeping \b je dors\b0\par
everybody is sleeping\b  tout le monde dort\b0\par
my friends are sleeping \b mes amis dorment\b0\par
I feel it \b je le sens\b0\par
dinner is being served \b on sert le d\'eener\b0\par
(24) 1.32\par
to put\par
I'm putting it on the table \b je le mets sur la table\b0\par
he is putting it on the table \b il le met sur la table\b0\par
where are you putting it? \b o\'f9 le mettez-vous?\b0\par
put the book on the table please \b mettez le livre sur la table, s'il vous pla\'eet\b0\par
don't put it here! \b ne le mettez pas ici!\b0\par
(25) 2.27\par
to start\par
start now!\par
don't start!\par
let's start!\par
let's not start!\par
let's wait!\par
let's not wait!\par
let's put the book on the table \b mettons le livre sur la table\b0\par
on the floor \b par terre\b0\par
let's not put it on the floor \b ne le mettons pas par terre\b0\par
don't put it on the floor! \b ne le mettez pas par terre!\b0\par
(\i in a positive command, the pronoun goes after the verb\i0 )\par
put it here! \b mettez-le ici!\b0\par
\b\par
\b0 (end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 2 (76.07)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 3.47\par
don't put it there \b ne le mettez pas l\'e0\b0\par
I am putting it here\b  je le mets ici\b0\par
we are putting it here \b nous le mettons ici\b0\par
don't put it here \b ne le mettez pas ici\b0\par
put it here \b mettez-le ici\b0\par
don't put it there \b ne le mettez pas l\'e0\b0\par
put them on the table \b mettez-les sur la table\b0\par
don't put them on the floor\b  ne les mettez pas par terre\b0\par
I'm calling you \b je vous appelle\b0\par
you are being called \b on vous appelles\b0\par
call me later! \b appelez-moi plus tard!\b0\par
don't call me today, call me tomorrow \b ne m'appeler pas aujourd'hui appelez-moi demain\b0\par
wait for me! \b attendez-moi!\b0\par
(\i an alternative to this imperative is a polite form using \b voulez-vous\b0\i0 )\par
Will you wait for me \b voulez-vous m'attendre?\b0\par
wait for me!\par
don't wait for me \b ne m'attendez pas\b0\par
(2) 1.39\par
you have to wait for me \b vous devez m'attendre\b0\par
one has to wait for me \b on doit m'attendre\b0\par
wait for me\par
don't wait for me\par
(3) 3.14\par
I will do it\b  je le ferai\b0\par
I have\par
he has\par
they have \b ils ont\b0\par
to leave\par
I will leave \b je partirai\b0\par
he will leave \b il partira\b0\par
they will leave\b  ils partiront\b0\par
we will leave \b nous partirons\b0\par
you will leave \b vous partirez\b0\par
(4) 3.56\par
(\i there are a few exceptions in the future tense, but they concern stems and not endings. For example \b -oir\b0  verbs contract\i0 )\par
to be able \b pouvoir\b0\par
I will be able \b je pourrai\b0\par
to have to \b devoir\b0\par
I will have to \b je devrai\b0\par
we will have to leave soon \b nous devrons partir bient\'f4t; on devra partir bient\'f4t\b0\par
I will have it \b je l'aurai\b0\par
we will have it \b nous l'aurons\b0\par
I will know \b je saurai\b0\par
I will tell you later \b je vais dirai plus tard\b0\par
I will write to you \b je vous \'e9crirai\b0\par
I will do it \b je le ferai\b0\par
he won't do it \b il ne le fera pas\b0\par
he won't tell you why he won't do it \b il ne vous dira pas pourquoi il ne le fera pas\b0\par
(5) 0.55\par
to put\par
I will put it here \b je le mettrais ici\b0\par
(\i all English composite verbs ending \b -mit\b0  come from the French \b mettre\b0\i0 )\par
to commit \b commettre\b0\par
to omit \b omettre\b0\par
to permit \b permettre\b0\par
to submit \b soumettre\b0\par
to promise \b promettre\b0\par
I promise \b je promets\b0\par
I promise you \b je vous promets\b0\par
(6) 1.03\par
I will put it here \b je le mettrai ici\b0\par
I will take it \b je le prendrai\b0\par
I won't understand him\b  je ne le comprendrai pas\b0\par
he will sell it \b il le vendra\b0\par
he's selling it \b il le vend\b0\par
they're selling it \b ils le vendent\b0\par
(7) 2.47\par
to come\par
I am coming \b je viens\b0\par
they are coming \b ils viennent\b0\par
they are coming from Vienna \b ils viennent de Viennes\b0\par
it is coming \b\'e7a vient\b0\par
it is going to come \b\'e7a va venir\b0\par
I will come \b je viendrai\b0\par
we will come \b nous viendrons\b0\par
to come back \b revenir\b0\par
I will come back \b je reviendrai\b0\par
they will come back soon \b ils reviendrent bient\'f4t\b0\par
we will come back soon \b nous reviendrons bient\'f4t\b0\par
we are going to come back soon \b nous allons revenir bient\'f4t\b0\par
(8) 3.03\par
to be \b\'eatre\b0\par
I will be \b je serai\b0\par
he will be \b il sera\b0\par
they will be \b ils serent\b0\par
we will be \b nous serons\b0\par
you will be \b vous serez\b0\par
(\i the French verb \b aller\b0  is irregular because it comes from three separate Latin verbs\i0 )\par
I'm going\par
he is going\par
they are going \b ils vent\b0\par
they're going to be here soon \b ils vent \'eatre ici bient\'f4t\b0\par
they will be here tonight \b ils vent \'eatre ici ce soir; ils serent ici ce soir\b0\par
(9) 2.31\par
it won't be possible to do it that way \b ce ne sera pas possible de le faire comme \'e7a\b0\par
it won't be necessary to do it today \b ce ne sera pas n\'e9cessaire de le faire aujourd'hui\b0\par
it will take too much time that way \b\'e7a prendra trop de temps comme \'e7a\b0\par
it will take too much time \b\'e7a prendra trop de temps \b0\par
it's a pleasure to see you \b\'e7a me fait plaisir de vous voir\b0\par
I enjoy very much seeing you \b\'e7a me fait grand plaisir de vous voir\b0\par
I will enjoy seeing you \b\'e7a me fera plaisir de vous voir\b0\par
(\i this means "I'm looking forward to seeing you"\i0 )\par
(10) 2.07\par
I'm going\par
he's going\par
they're going\par
we are going\par
you're going\par
they're going to come with us\b  ils vent venir avec nous\b0\par
I will go \b j'irai\b0\par
he will go \b il ira\b0\par
we will go \b nous irons\b0\par
they will go \b ils irent\b0\par
you will go \b vous irez\b0\par
I will go there\b  j'y irais\b0\par
we will go there tonight \b nous y irons ce soir\b0\par
(11) 2.06\par
(\i there are three ways in French to express the future tense\i0 )\par
I will call you tomorrow \b je vous appellerai demain; je vais vous appeller demain; je vous appele demain\b0\par
I will call you next week \b je vous appele la semaine prochaine\b0\par
(12) 2.46\par
(\i in the long box, there is a single exception for \b nous\b0  and three exceptions for \b vous\b0\i0 )\par
we are \b nous sommes\b0\par
you are \b vous \'eates\b0\par
you are doing, you are making\b  vous faites\b0\par
you are saying, you are telling \b vous dites\b0\par
what are you doing? \b qu'est-ce que vous faites?\b0\par
what are you saying? \b qu'est-ce que vous dites?\b0\par
I don't understand what you're saying \b je ne comprends pas ce que vous dites\b0\par
tell me! \b dites-moi!\b0\par
don't tell me, I don't want to know it \b ne me dites pas, je ne veux pas le savoir\b0\par
don't tell it to me \b ne me le dites pas\b0\par
don't tell it to him \b ne le lui dites pas\b0\par
don't tell it to her \b ne le lui dites pas\b0\par
(13) 2.03\par
(\i the key to the short box is the sound of the 1st person \b je\b0\i0 )\par
nobody knows where it is\b  personne sait o\'f9 c'est\b0\par
everybody wants to see it \b tout le monde veut le voir\b0\par
nobody can find it \b personne peut le trouver\b0\par
everything must be ready today \b tout doit \'eatre pr\'eat aujourd'hu\b0 i\par
(\i whereas the key to the long box is the infinitive of the verb\i0 )\par
nobody knows\par
we know \b nous savons\b0\par
(14) 2.50\par
(\b\i prendre, comprendre, apprendre, rependre \b0 all lose \b -d-\b0  in \b nous, vous, ils\b0\i0 )\par
we understand \b nous comprenons\b0\par
you understand \b vous comprenez\b0\par
do you understand? \b comprenez-vous?\b0\par
do you understand it? \b le comprenez-vous?\b0\par
do you understand me? \b me comprenez-vous?\b0\par
we are taking it \b nous le prenons\b0\par
why don't you take it? \b parce que ne le prenez-vous pas?\b0\par
they take \b ils prennent\b0\par
they don't understand it\b  ils ne le comprennent pas\b0\par
(15) 1.59\par
(\i there are three irregular verbs in French\i0 )\par
I have \b j'ai\b0\par
he has \b il a\b0\par
they have \b ils ont\b0\par
I go \b je vais\b0\par
he's going \b il va\b0\par
they're going \b ils vent\b0\par
we have \b nous avons\b0\par
you have \b vous avez\b0\par
we are going \b nous allons\b0\par
you are going \b vous allez\b0\par
I am \b je suis\b0\par
he is \b il est\b0\par
they are \b ils sont\b0\par
we are \b nous sommes\b0\par
you are \b vous \'eates\b0\par
where are they? \b o\'f9 sont-ils?\b0\par
they are not there \b ils ne sont pas l\'e0\b0\par
(\b\i l\'e0 \b0 also means "to be in, to be home"\i0 )\par
they are not in \b ils ne sont pas l\'e0\b0\par
he's not in \b il n'est pas l\'e0\b0\par
(16) 1.04\par
(\b\i faire \b0 is also irregular in the "they" form\i0 )\par
they are \b ils sont\b0\par
they have \b ils ont\b0\par
they are going\b  ils vont\b0\par
they are doing, making \b ils font\b0\par
they are doing it \b ils le font\b0\par
they are not doing it \b ils ne le font pas\b0\par
they are not in \b ils ne sont pas l\'e0\b0\par
(17) 4.03\par
(\i for the past tense, use \b avoir\b0 . So, "I bought it" becomes "I have bought it"\i0 )\par
(\b\i -er \b0 verbs now end \b\'e9\b0 , both sound the same\i0 )\par
I spoke \b j'ai parl\'e9\b0\par
he spoke \b il a parl\'e9\b0\par
did you speak? \b avez-vous parl\'e9?\b0\par
we didn't speak with him \b nous n'avons pan parl\'e9 avec lui\b0\par
when did you speak with him? \b quand avez-vous parl\'e9 avec lui?\b0\par
did you buy something? \b avez-vous achet\'e9 quelque chose?\b0\par
what did you buy? \b qu'est-ce que vous avez achet\'e9?\b0\par
he prepared a dinner \b il a prepar\'e9 un d\'eener\b0\par
the film has started \b le film a commenc\'e9\b0\par
(18) 2.31\par
already \b d\'e9j\'e0\b0\par
still, still more \b encore\b0\par
I would like another cup of coffee \b je voudrais encore une tasse de caf\'e9\b0\par
a little more \b encore un peu\b0\par
not yet \b pas encore\b0\par
we haven't started yet \b nous n'avons pas encore commenc\'e9\b0\par
the film has started \b le film a commenc\'e9\b0\par
the film has started already\b  le film a commenc\'e9 d\'e9j\'e0\b0\par
ago \b il y a\b0\par
ten minutes ago \b il y a dix minutes\b0\par
two days ago \b il y a deux jours\b0\par
(19) 6.32\par
I have it\par
I don't have it\par
I have them\par
I don't have them\par
I have some, I have some of it \b j'en ai\b0\par
I don't have any \b je n'en ai pas\b0\par
(\i in the past tense, all the pronouns come before the verb\i0 )\par
I bought it \b je l'ai achet\'e9\b0\par
I didn't buy it \b je ne l'ai pas achet\'e9\b0\par
I bought them \b je les ai achet\'e9\b0\par
I didn't buy them \b je ne les ai pas achet\'e9\b0\par
I bought some for you\b  j'en ai achet\'e9 pour vous\b0\par
I didn't buy any today because I didn't find any \b je n'en ai pas achet\'e9 parce que je n'en ai pas trouv\'e9\b0\par
how many did you buy of them? \b combien en avez-vous achet\'e9?\b0\par
where did you buy them? \b o\'f9 les avez-vous achet\'e9?\b0\par
to forget \b oublier\b0\par
I forgot where I bought them \b j'ai oubli\'e9 o\'f9 je les ai achet\'e9\b0\par
at what time did you call?\b  \'e0 quelle heure avez-vous appel\'e9?\b0\par
at what time did you call me? \b\'e0 quelle heure m'avez-vous appel\'e9?\b0\par
she called me this morning \b elle m'a appel\'e9 ce matin\b0\par
why did you call me? \b pourquoi m'avez-vous appel\'e9?\b0\par
why didn't you call me? \b pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas appel\'e9?\b0\par
I called them \b je les ai appel\'e9\b0\par
I called him \b je l'ai appel\'e9\b0\par
I called her \b je l'ai appel\'e9\b0\par
I called you \b je vous ai appel\'e9\b0\par
I didn't call you \b je ne vais ai pas appel\'e9\b0\par
to ask\par
I asked you \b je vous ai demand\'e9\b0\par
I didn't ask you \b je ne vous ai pas demand\'e9\b0\par
why did you ask me? \b pourquoi m'avez-vous demand\'e9?\b0\par
why didn't you ask me? \b pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas demand\'e9?\b0\par
(20) 3.14\par
(\b\i -re \b0 verbs take \b -u\b0  in past tense\i0 )\par
I sold it \b je l'ai vendu\b0\par
why did you sell it? \b pourquoi l'avez-vous vendu?\b0\par
why didn't you sell them? \b pourquoi ne les avez-vous pas vendu?\b0\par
he sold them \b il les a vendu\b0\par
we sold some \b nous en avons vendu\b0\par
I waited \b j'ai attendu\b0\par
I waited for you \b je vous ai attendu\b0\par
you didn't wait for me \b vous ne m'avez pas attendu\b0\par
why didn't you wait for me? \b pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas attendu?\b0\par
(\b\i -ir \b0 verbs take \b -i\b0  in the past tense\i0 )\par
we finished \b nous avons fini\b0\par
at what time did you finish? \b\'e0 quelle heure avez-vous fini?\b0\par
he slept \b il a dormi\b0\par
we slept well \b nous avons bien dormi\b0\par
bad, badly \b mal\b0\par
he slept very badly \b il a mal dormi\b0\par
(21) 1.49\par
(\i instead of \b avoir\b0 , you can use a construction involving \b\'eatre\b0\i0 )\par
he prepared the dinner \b il a prepar\'e9 le d\'eener\b0\par
dinner is prepared \b le d\'eener est prepar\'e9\b0\par
he sold it \b il l'a vendu\b0\par
everything is sold \b tout est vendu\b0\par
nothing is sold yet \b rien est vendu encore\b0\par
one served  the dinner \b on a servi le d\'eener\b0\par
dinner is served \b le d\'eener est servi\b0\par
(22) 3.24\par
(a\i  few verbs are a regular in the past tense.For example \b comprendre \b0 etc becomes \b compris\b0  etc\i0 )\par
understood \b compris\b0\par
service included \b service compris\b0\par
service is included \b le service est compris\b0\par
service is not included \b le service n'est pas compris\b0\par
did you understand? \b avez-vous compris?\b0\par
did you understand it? \b est-ce que vous l'avez compris?\b0\par
did you understand me? \b m'avez-vous compris?\b0\par
why did you not understand me?\b  pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas compris?\b0\par
I understood you \b je vous ai compris\b0\par
I understood you well \b je vous ai bien compris\b0\par
I understood you very well \b je vous ai tr\'e8s bien compris\b0\par
(\b\i prendre \b0 becomes \b pris\b0\i0 )\par
I took them \b je les ai pris\b0\par
I took some of it \b j'en ai pris\b0\par
why did you take them?\b  pourquoi les avez-vous pris?\b0\par
why didn't you take them? \b pourquoi ne les avez-vous pas pris?\b0\par
(\b\i apprendre \b0 becomes \b appris\b0\i0 )\par
I learned \b j'ai appris\b0\par
I learned something today\b  j'ai appris quelque chose aujourd'hui\b0\par
(\b\i j'ai appris \b0 also means "I found out"\i0 )\par
(23) 2.48\par
(\b\i mettre \b0 becomes \b mis\b0\i0 )\par
where did you put it? \b o\'f9 l'avez-vous mis?\b0\par
where did you put them? \b o\'f9 les avez-vous mis?\b0\par
I forgot where I put them \b j'ai oubli\'e9 o\'f9 je les ai mis\b0\par
to admit\b  admettre\b0\par
to omit \b omettre\b0\par
to permit \b permettre\b0\par
to promise \b promettre\b0\par
(\b\i promettre \b0 becomes \b promis\b0\i0 )\par
I promise you\b  je vous ai promis\b0\par
I did not promise you \b je ne vous ai pas promis\b0\par
you promised me \b vous m'avez promis\b0\par
I promised him \b je lui ai promis\b0\par
it is promised \b c'est promis\b0\par
(24) 5.18\par
(\i three more: \b faire \b0 becomes \b fait, dire \b0 becomes \b dit\b0 , \b\'e9crire \b0 becomes \b\'e9crit\b0\i0 )\par
he is doing\b  it il le fait\b0\par
he did it \b il l'a fait\b0\par
(\i English \b -ct\b0  verbs come from French\i0 )\par
the fact \b le fait\b0\par
the object\b  l'objet\b0\par
the subject \b le sujet\b0\par
he is doing it \b il le fait\b0\par
he did it \b il l'a fait\b0\par
it is done \b c'est fait\b0\par
I didn't do it \b je ne l'ai pas fait\b0\par
why did you do it? \b pourquoi l'avez-vous fait?\b0\par
why didn't you do it? \b pourquoi ne l'avez-vous pas fait?\b0\par
he did it \b il l'a fait\b0\par
it is done \b c'est fait\b0\par
he didn't do it \b il ne l'a pas fait\b0\par
he told me \b il m'a dit\b0\par
I told you \b je vais ai dit\b0\par
I didn't tell you \b je ne vous ai pas dit\b0\par
you told me \b vous m'avez dit\b0\par
why didn't you tell me? \b pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas dit?\b0\par
I wrote to you \b je vous ai \'e9crit\b0\par
why didn't you write to me?\b  pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas \'e9crit?\b0\par
why didn't you call me? \b pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas appel\'e9?\b0\par
it is written \b c'est \'e9crit\b0\par
one told me \b on m'a dit\b0\par
(\i in English, this would be "I was told"\i0 )\par
I called you this morning\b  je vous ai appel\'e9 ce matin\b0\par
why didn't you buy them? \b pourquoi ne les avez-vous pas achet\'e9?\b0\par
(25) 4.05\par
I was\b  j'\'e9tais\b0\par
I had\b  j'avais\b0\par
I was very busy \b j'\'e9tais tr\'e8s occup\'e9\b0\par
he was here to \b il \'e9tait ici\b0\par
they were \b ils \'e9taient\b0\par
who was there?\b  qui \'e9tait l\'e0?\b0\par
nobody was there \b personne \'e9tait l\'e0\b0\par
I was there \b j'\'e9tais l\'e0\b0\par
I was very busy\b  j'\'e9tais tr\'e8s occup\'e9\b0\par
it was ready \b c'\'e9tait pr\'eat\b0\par
I was there but it wasn't ready yet \b j'\'e9tais l\'e0 mais ce n'\'e9tait pas pr\'eat encore\b0\par
last night \b hier soir\b0\par
who was there with you last night? \b qui \'e9tait l\'e0 avec vous hier soir?\b0\par
yes I was there but nobody was there oui \b j'\'e9tais l\'e0 mais personne \'e9tait l\'e0\b0\par
we were \b nous \'e9tions\b0\par
you were \b vous \'e9tiez\b0\par
(26) 1.23\par
(\i whenever  you have \b -ais \b0 in the short box, the full set of endings are always \b -ais -ait -aient \b0 (short) \b -ions -iez \b0 (long) \i0 )\par
I had \b j'avais\b0\par
he had \b il avait\b0\par
they had \b ils avaient\b0\par
we had \b nous avions\b0\par
you had \b vous aviez\b0\par
we had a plane \b nous avions un avion\b0\par
(27) 0.42\par
everything is sold\b  tout est vendu\b0\par
everything was sold \b tout \'e9tait vendu\b0\par
everything will be sold \b tout sera vendu\b0\par
(\i  because after any form of \b avoir \b0 or \b\'eatre\b0 , you always dive i.e. use \b -\'e9 -i -u\b0 ! )\i0\par
(28) 1.19\par
I would like \b je voudrais\b0\par
he would like \b il voudrait\b0\par
they would like \b ils voudraient\b0\par
everybody would like to see\b  \b0 it \b tout le monde voudrait le voir\b0\par
my friends would like to go there \b mes amis voudraient y aller\b0\par
we would like \b nous voudrions\b0\par
you would like \b vous voudriez\b0\par
(29) 1.09\par
(\b\i -rais, -rait, -raient, -rions, -riez \b0 express "would" and can be used with any verb\i0 )\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 3 (74.12)\par
\ulnone\b0 (1) 3.11\par
(\i "will" and "would" use the same contractions, i.e. "I will have" \b j'aurai \b0 "I would have" \b j'aurais\b0\i0 )\par
I will have\b  j'aurai\b0\par
he will have \b il aura\b0\par
they will have\b  ils aurent\b0\par
we will have \b nous aurons\b0\par
you will have \b vous aurez\b0\par
I would have\b  j'aurais\b0\par
he would have\b  il aurait\b0\par
they would have \b ils auraient\b0\par
we would have \b nous aurions\b0\par
you would have \b vous auriez\b0\par
I would have it \b je l'aurais\b0\par
we would have it \b nous l'aurions\b0\par
we would have them \b nous les aurions\b0\par
we would have brought them\b  nous les aurions acheter\b0\par
I was \b j'\'e9tais\b0\par
he was \b il \'e9tait\b0\par
he had \b il avait\b0\par
he would have\b  il aurait\b0\par
he will have \b il aura\b0\par
(2) 2.48\par
(\b\i -oir \b0 verbs in the past tense end \b -u \b0 e.g. \b voir \b0 becomes \b vu\b0\i0 )\par
I saw it\b  je l'ai vu\b0\par
if I had seen it \b si je l'avais vu\b0\par
if I had seen it I would have bought it \b si je l'avais vu, je l'aurais achet\'e9\b0\par
(\b\i savoir \b0 becomes \b su\b0\i0 )\par
if I had known it \b si je l'avais su\b0\par
I would have told you \b je vous aurais dit\b0\par
if I had known it, I would have told you \b si je l'avais su, je vous aurais dit\b0\par
if you had told me, I would have seen it and I would have bought it \b si vous m'aviez dit, je l'aurais vu et je l'aurais achet\'e9 m'aviez\b0\par
(3) 3.19\par
he wouldn't wait \b il n'attendrais pas\b0\par
you wouldn't wait vous \b n'attendrions pas\b0\par
we wouldn't wait nous \b n'attendrions pas\b0\par
(\i so "would" is \b -rais\b0  etc, and "would have" is therefore \b aurais \b0 etc\i0 )\par
he would sell it \b il le vendrait\b0\par
he would have sold it \b il l'aurait vendu\b0\par
I did it\b  je l'ai fait\b0\par
I didn't do it \b je ne l'ai pas fait\b0\par
why did you do it? \b pourquoi l'avez-vous fait?\b0\par
why didn't you do it? \b pourquoi ne l'avez-vous pas fait?\b0\par
I told you\b  je vous ai dit\b0\par
I didn't tell you \b je ne vous ai pas dit\b0\par
you didn't tell me \b vous ne m'avez pas dit\b0\par
why didn't you tell me? \b pourquoi ne m'avez-vous pas dit?\b0\par
(4) 2.07\par
was \'e9tait \b\'e9tions \'e9tiez\b0\par
had avait \b avions aviez\b0\par
would have \b aurais aurions auriez\b0\par
I was busy \b j'\'e9tais occup\'e9\b0\par
he was not here\b  il n'\'e9tait pas ici\b0\par
who was there last night? \b qui \'e9tait l\'e0 hier soir?\b0\par
nobody was there \b personne \'e9tait l\'e0\b0\par
I was there with my friend but you were not there \b j'\'e9tais l\'e0 avec mon ami mais vous n'\'e9tiez pas l\'e0\b0\par
I was very busy and I didn't have the time to do it\b  j'\'e9tait tr\'e8s occup\'e9 et je n'avais pas le temps de le faire\b0\par
(5) 1.58\par
(\b\i avoir \b0 becomes \b eu, savoir \b0 becomes \b su, pouvoir \b0 becomes \b pu, devoir \b0 becomes \b du, voir \b0 becomes \b vu\i0 )\b0\par
did you see? \b avez-vous vu?\b0\par
did you see it? \b l'avez-vous vu?\b0\par
where did you see me? \b o\'f9 m'avez-vous vu?\b0\par
I was there last night but I didn't see you\b  j'\'e9tais l\'e0 hier soir mais je ne vous ai pas vu\b0\par
where were you? \b o\'f9 \'e9tiez-vous?\b0\par
I didn't see you \b je ne vous ai pas vu\b0\par
(6)1.48\par
(\i the three steps on the diving board are: at the top "would have" \b aurais \b0 (conditional), in the middle "had" \b avais \b0 (perfect past tense) and at the bottom "have" \b ai \b0 (past tense) \i0 )\par
I had \b j'avais\b0\par
I would have \b j'aurais\b0\par
I saw it \b je l'ai vu\b0\par
had \b avais aviez avions\b0\par
would have \b aurais auriez aurions\b0\par
I saw it \b je l'ai vu\b0\par
if I had seen it \b si je l'avais vu\b0\par
I would have seen it \b je l'aurais vu\b0\par
and I would have told you why I didn't buy it at \b je vous aurais dit pourquoi je ne l'ai pas achet\'e9\b0\par
(7) 1.31 \par
he told me that you wouldn't do it \b il m'a dit que vous ne le feriez pas\b0\par
I had \b j'avais\b0\par
if you had told it to me, I would have known it \b si vous me l'aviez dit, je l'aurais su\b0\par
(8) 5.55\par
(\i with a handful of French verbs, you don't dive from the low diving board\i0 .\i  e.g. "I was" is not "I have been" but \b j'\'e9tais\b0\i0 )\par
we were \b nous \'e9tions\b0\par
you were \b vous \'e9tiez\b0\par
I had \b j'avais\b0\par
I would have \b j'aurais\b0\par
if I had had \b si j'avais eu\b0\par
I was \b j'\'e9tais\b0\par
been \b\'e9t\'e9\b0\par
summer \b\'e9t\'e9\b0\par
summer fashion \b mode d'\'e9t\'e9\b0\par
summer dress \b mode d'\'e9t\'e9\b0\par
I had been \b j'avais \'e9t\'e9\b0\par
if I had been there, I would have seen it si j'avais \'e9t\'e9 l\'e0, je l'aurais vu\par
you would have seen it if you had been there last night \b vous l'auriez vu si vous aviez \'e9t\'e9 l\'e0 hier soir\b0\par
(\i of course, you don't "dive" after a handle verb\i0 )\par
you can \b vous pouvez\b0\par
I could \b je pouvais\b0\par
they could \b ils pouvaient\b0\par
nobody could wait \b personne pouvait attendre\b0\par
we could \b nous pouvions\b0\par
you could \b vous pouviez\b0\par
was \b\'e9tait \'e9tiez \'e9tions\b0\par
had \b avait aviez azions\b0\par
could \b pouvait pouviez pouvions\b0\par
(9) 1.30\par
had to (i.e. must) \b devais devions deviez\b0\par
he had to wait \b il devait attendre\b0\par
one had to wait \b on devait attendre\b0\par
we had to wait \b nous devions attendre\b0\par
I wanted \b je voulais\b0\par
(10) 4.33\par
he had to wait\b  il devait attendre\b0\par
(\i don't confuse "had" and "had to"\i0 )\par
you have to wait \b vous devez attendre\b0\par
(\i and, "you have to wait" = "you must wait", but "you don't have to wait" is not "you mustn't wait" but "you don't need to wait"\i0 )\par
to need \b avoir besoin\b0\par
you don't have to wait vous \b n'avez pas besoin d'attendre\b0\par
you don't have to give it to him \b vous n'avez pas besoin de le lui donner\b0\par
you don't have to need to give it to \b me vous n'avez pas besoin de me le donner\b0\par
(11) 1.39\par
(\i "Will" usually expresses the future, but not always\i0 )\par
Will you tell me? \b voulez-vous me dire?\b0\par
when will you tell me? \b quand me dirais-vous?\b0\par
(12) 2.53\par
was\par
had\par
could \b pouvais pouviez pouvions\b0\par
had to \b devais deviez devions\b0\par
wanted \b voulais vouliez voulions\b0\par
I didn't want to do it \b je ne voulais pas le faire\b0\par
he didn't want to tell me\b  il ne voulais pas me dire\b0\par
I knew \b je savais\b0\par
I didn't know\b  je ne savais pas\b0\par
nobody knew where it was, nobody could find it \b personne savais o\'f9 c'\'e9tait personne pouvait le trouver\b0\par
was\par
had\par
could\par
wanted\par
had to\par
knew\par
(\i these are the few cases where you don't dive\i0 )\par
(13) 2.24\par
(\i that applies to the simple past. For "had" of course you must dive\i0 )\par
I knew where it was \b je savais o\'f9 c'\'e9tait\b0\par
if I had known where it was I would have told it to you\b  si j'avais su o\'f9 c'\'e9tait, je vous l'aurais dit\b0\par
I wanted to buy it \b je voulais l'acheter\b0\par
(\b\i vouloir \b0 becomes \b voulu\b0 )\i0\par
if I had wanted to have it, I would have bought it\b  si j'avais voulu l'avoir, je l'aurais achet\'e9\b0\par
(14) 3.49\par
(\i there is one more handle: \b aller\b0 . In the past, use \b ais\b0\i0 )\par
I was going \b j'allais\b0\par
I was going to do it \b j'allais le faire\b0\par
I wasn't going to tell you \b je n'allais pas vous dire\b0\par
I didn't know you were going to come today \b je ne savais pas que vous alliez venir aujourd'hui\b0\par
you didn't tell me that you were going to be here this afternoon \b vous ne m'avez pas dit que vous alliez \'eatre ici cet apr\'e8s-midi\b0\par
we were going to leave today \b nous allions partir aujourd'hui\b0\par
(15) 1.58\par
if you had called me this morning and if you had told me that you were going to arrive today, I would have waited for you and we would have had dinner \b si vous m'aviez appel\'e9 ce matin et si vous m'aviez dit que vous alliez arriver aujourd'hui, je vous aurais attendu et nous aurions din\'e9\b0\par
(16) 3.08\par
I am going to do it \b je vais le faire\b0\par
I was going to do it \b j'allais le faire\b0\par
we are going to do it\b  nous allons le faire\b0\par
we were going to do it \b nous allions le faire\b0\par
you are going to do it \b vous allez le faire\b0\par
you were going to do it \b vous alliez le faire\b0\par
he is going to do it \b il va le faire\b0\par
he wasn't going to do it \b il n'allais pas le faire\b0\par
we are going to leave \b nous allons partir\b0\par
we were going to leave \b nous allions partir\b0\par
you didn't tell me that you were going to arrive today vous \b ne m'avez pas dit que vous alliez arriver aujourd'hui\b0\par
(17) 5.00\par
(\i so the w-ing tenses "I was (go)ing, they were (go)ing - can be used with any verb. In French, the -ing verb is an \b -ais, -ait \b0 verb\i0 )\par
I am staying \b je reste\b0\par
I was staying \b je restais\b0\par
we were staying here \b nous restions ici\b0\par
he is waiting for me \b il m'attend\b0\par
he was waiting for me \b il m'attendait\b0\par
we were waiting for you \b nous vous attendions\b0\par
we are waiting for you \b nous vous attendons\b0\par
he is leaving \b il part\b0\par
he was leaving \b il partait\b0\par
we were leaving \b nous partions\b0\par
(\i the w-ing tense is used more in French than in English. The w-in tense expresses a straight line in the past, e.g. "I was doing it" \b je le faisais\b0\i0 )\par
I was doing it \b je le faisais\b0\par
I was telling it\b  je le disais\b0\par
to read\b  lire\b0\par
I was reading \b je lisais\b0\par
to write \b\'e9crire\b0\par
I was writing \b j'\'e9crivais\b0\par
I was doing it \b je le faisais\b0\par
(\i in French, this straight line could also be a broken line, meaning in English "I used to do it" or "I did it repeatedly (every day, very often)\i0  )\par
I used to do it \b je le faisais\b0\par
I did it \i (continuous line)\i0  \b je l'ai fait\b0\par
I did it every day \i (broken line) \b\i0 je le faisais tous les jours\b0\par
I did it often \i (broken line)\i0  \b je le faisais tr\'e8s souvent\b0\par
he prepared it this morning \b il l'a prepar\'e9 ce matin\b0\par
he prepared it (every day), he used to prepare it \b il le preparais\b0\par
(18) 3.03\par
(\b\i -er \b0 verbs can usually be guessed from the English equivalent. \b -ir \b0 verbs are a closed book - no new verbs will ever be added, the same for \b -oir\b0  verbs\i0 )\par
(19) 2.49\par
(\b\i -ir \b0 verbs have two branches. The one we have been using is finished - no new verbs will be added. The other branch is "living", implying going, becoming, growing, getting - i.e. movement. e.g. \b finir \b0 "to go to the end" or "to finish". These are conjugated differently from other \b -ir\b0  verbs - you just drop the \b -r \b0 from the infinitive\i0 )\par
I finish\b  je finis\b0\par
he is finishing \b il finit\b0\par
(\b\i -ss-\b0  is used in all the plurals\i0 )\par
we finish \b nous finissons\b0\par
you finish \b vous finissez\b0\par
they finish \b ils finissent\b0\par
(20) 2.26\par
(\i will now give some French \b -ir\b0  verbs. Try to work out what they mean\i0 )\par
to grow (grow big)\b  grandir\b0\par
the child is growing \b l'enfant grandit\b0\par
the children are growing \b les enfants grandissent\b0\par
to blush, turn\b  red rougir\b0\par
you are blushing! \b vous rougissez!\b0\par
to turn \b pale p\'e2lir\b0\par
you are going pale \b vous p\'e2lissez\b0\par
to grow old \b vieillir\b0\par
he is growing old \b il vieillit\b0\par
they are growing old \b ils vieillissent\b0\par
to grow young again, rejuvenate \b rajeunir\b0\par
(21) 2.12\par
to land \b atterir\b0\par
we are landing in a few minutes \b nous atterissons dans quelque minutes\b0\par
to land on the water (seaplane) \b amerrir\b0\par
to land on the moon \b alunir\b0\par
(\i in French you don't literally say "land on the water" or "land on the moon" since it is not logically possible\i0 )\par
(22) 4.32\par
(\i now talking about a family of verbs ending \b -vrir \b0 e.g. \b ouvrir \b0 or \b -frir \b0 e.g. \b offrir\b0 . They behave as \b -er\b0  verbs, except the past participle. e.g. \b ouvert \b0 means "open" and "opened"\i0 )\par
I opened it \b je l'ai ouvert\b0\par
it is open, it is opened \b c'est ouvert\b0\par
(\i also \b couvert \b0 "covered", \b d\'e9couvert \b0 "discovered", \b offert \b0 "offered"\i0 )\par
I offered it to you \b je vous l'ai offert\b0\par
I offered it\b  je l'ai offert\b0\par
I offered it to him \b je le lui ai offert\b0\par
(23) 3.29\par
(\i use of \b tu \b0 - it is in the short box and follows the sound of "I", except for three verbs where it follows the sound of "he"\i0 )\par
you have \b tu as\b0\par
you are going \b tu va\b0\par
you are\b  tu es\b0\par
(\b\i tu\b0  as an object is \b te\b0\i0 )\par
what are you saying? \b qu'est-ce que tu dis?\b0\par
I am telling you \b je te dis\b0\par
(24) 3.07\par
I'm doing it \b je le fais\b0\par
I don't do it \b je le fais pas\b0\par
(\i for "I have been doing it for/since", use present tense plus \b depuis \b0 "since"\i0 )\par
he has been working here for a long time \b il travaille ici depuis longtemps d\'e9j\'e0\b0\par
(25) 2.08\par
if you had been here last night he would have seen it and you would have bought it \b si vous aviez \'e9t\'e9 ici hier soir, vous l'auriez va et vous l'auriez achet\'e9\b0\par
everything his sold \b tout est vendu\b0\par
everything was sold \b tout \'e9tait vendu\b0\par
everything will be sold \b tout sera vendu\b0\par
everything would be sold \b tout serais vendu\b0\par
everything would have been sold \b tout aurait \'e9t\'e9 vendu\b0\par
(26) 1.25\par
(\i will now give three master keys to unlock the door to 19 tenses. Key #1: -ing. I am waiting, I have been waiting, I was waiting, I will be waiting (I will wait), I would be waiting (I would wait)\i0  )\par
\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
\ul\b CD 4 (76.28)\ulnone\b0\par
(1) 6.36\par
(\i note that in English, you can use -ing by itself or after a preposition, without expressing a tense, e.g. "he left without saying a word, seeing is believing \b voir c'est croire\b0 , understanding everything is forgiving everything \b tout comprendre c'est tout pardonner, \b0 leaving is dying a little \b partir c'est mourir un peu\b0\i0 )\par
(2) 5.53\par
(\i Key #2: \b -r-\b0  will or would have\i0 )\par
(\i Key #3: two diving towers, to have and to be, after which there is no place else but to dive\i0 )\par
(\i these are the nineteen cases\i0 )\par
he is selling the house \b il vend la maison\b0\par
he was selling the house \b il vendait la maison\b0\par
he sold the house \b il a vendu la maison\b0\par
he has been selling the house for a long time \b il vend la maison depuis longtemps\b0\par
the house is sold \b la maison est vendu\b0\par
the house was sold \b la maison \'e9tait vendu\b0\par
the house has been sold \b la maison a \'e9te vendu\b0\par
he will sell the house \b il vendra la maison\b0\par
he is going to sell the house \b il vais vendre la maison\b0\par
the house will be sold \b la maison sera vendu\b0\par
the house is going to be sold \b la maison va \'eatre vendu\b0\par
he would sell the house \b il vendrait la maison\b0\par
the house would be sold \b la maison serait vendu\b0\par
if I had sold the house \b si j'avais vendu la maison\b0\par
if the house had been sold \b si la maison avait \'e9t\'e9 vendu\b0\par
he would have sold the house \b il aurait vendu la maison\b0\par
the house would have been sold \b la maison aurait \'e9t\'e9 vendu\b0\par
he will have sold the house \b il aura vendu la maison\b0\par
the house will have been sold \b la maison aura \'e9t\'e9 vendu\b0\par
(3) 1.29\par
we would be very busy \b noun serions tr\'e8s occup\'e9\b0\par
he would be ready \b nous serions pr\'eats\b0\par
we would have been ready \b nous aurions \'e9t\'e9 pr\'eats\b0\par
(4) 4.34\par
(\i for some French verbs, you dive from the \b\'eatre \b0 tower, not the \b avoir \b0 tower. For verbs of coming and going, use \b\'eatre\b0\i0 )\par
I went to see it \b je suis all\'e9 le voir\b0\par
we went \b nous sommes all\'e9\b0\par
he went \b il est all\'e9\b0\par
they went \b ils sont all\'e9\b0\par
you went \b vous \'eates all\'e9\b0\par
where did you go? \b o\'f9 \'eates-vous all\'e9?\b0\par
I didn't go \b je ne suis pas all\'e9\b0\par
he came with us \b il est venu avec nous\b0\par
he came back \b il est revenu\b0\par
we came back \b nous sommes revenu\b0\par
at what time did you come back? \b\'e0 quelle heure \'eates-vous revenu?\b0\par
they came back \b ils sont revenu\b0\par
he didn't come back yet \b il n'est pas encore revenu\b0\par
(5) 6.43\par
(\i actually, there is a going group and a coming group. The going group is \b aller\b0  "to go", \b sortir \b0 "to go out", \b partir \b0 "to leave"\i0 )\par
we went out last night \b nous sommes sorti hier soir\b0\par
where did you go? \b o\'f9 \'eates-vous all\'e9?\b0\par
he left a few minutes ago \b il est parti il ya a quelque minutes\b0\par
(\i the going group is \b venir, revenir, retourner, arriver\b0\i0 )\par
we arrived \b nous sommes arriv\'e9\b0\par
at what time did you arrive?\b  \'e0 quelle heure \'eates-vous arriv\'e9?\b0\par
he didn't arrive yet \b il n'est pas encore arriv\'e9\b0\par
(\i there's a third group which includes going and coming, e.g. \b entrer\b0\i0 )\par
he came in \b il est entr\'e9\b0\par
(\i and also \b rentrer \b0 to re-enter (i.e. the home) \i0 )\par
at what time did you come home last night? \b\'e0 quelle heure \'eates-vous rentr\'e9 hier soir?\b0\par
he didn't come home yet \b il n'est pas encore rentr\'e9\b0\par
(\i also \b monter\b0  to go up, come up\i0 )\par
I went up \b je suis mont\'e9\b0\par
we went up \b nous sommes mont\'e9\b0\par
they came up \b ils sont mont\'e9\b0\par
(\i also \b descendre \b0 to go down, come down\i0 )\par
I went down \b je suis descendu\b0\par
he came down \b il est descendu\b0\par
(\i and one more which is neither coming nor going, \b rester\b0  to stay\i0 )\par
I stayed \b je suis rest\'e9\b0\par
how long did you stay? \b combien de temps \'eates-vous rest\'e9?\b0\par
we didn't stay long, we left right after dinner \b nous ne sommes pas rest\'e9 longtemps, nous sommes parti toute suite apr\'e8s le d\'eener\b0\par
and we went to the cinema \b et nous sommes rentr\'e9 tr\'e8s tard\b0\par
(6) 1.38\par
(\b\i monter \b0 expresses any motion  up: bringing up, carrying up etc. In any sense except "going up", "coming up", \b monter\b0  uses \b avoir\b0 . This also applies to \b descendre\b0\i0 )\par
the bellboy went up and he brought up my suitcase \b le gar\'e7on est mont\'e9 est il a mont\'e9 ma valise\b0\par
\b he came down il est descendu\par
\b0 and he brought down my suitcase \b et il a descendu ma valise\b0\par
(7) 6.14\par
to lift up \b lever\b0\par
I'm lifting it up \b je le l\'e8ve\b0\par
I'm getting up \b je me l\'e8ve\b0\par
we are getting up \b nous nous levons\b0\par
you're getting up \b vous vous levez\b0\par
he is getting up \b il se l\'e8ve\b0\par
they are getting up \b ils se l\'e8vent\b0\par
she is getting up \b elle se l\'e8ve\b0\par
everybody is getting up \b tout le monde se l\'e8ve\b0\par
nobody is getting up \b personne se l\'e8ve\b0\par
it is getting up \b\'e7a se l\'e8ve\b0\par
you are getting up \b tu te l\'e8ves\b0\par
heavy \b lourd\b0\par
I cannot lift it up because it's too heavy \b je ne peux pas le lever parce que c'est trop lourd\b0\par
Will you lift it up please? \b voulez-vous le lever s'il vous pla\'eet?\b0\par
can you lift it up? \b pouvez-vous le lever?\b0\par
lift it up! \b levez-le!\b0\par
don't lift it up, it is very heavy \b ne le levez pas, c'est tr\'e8s lourd\b0\par
I'm getting up \b je me l\'e8ve\b0\par
get up please! \b levez-vous!\b0\par
don't get up \b ne vous levez pas\b0\par
I'm going to get up soon \b je vais me lever bient\'f4t\b0\par
we are going to get up soon \b nous allons nous lever bient\'f4t\b0\par
one is going to get up \b on va se lever\b0\par
(8) 2.12\par
to hurry \b se d\'e9p\'eacher\b0\par
I'm hurrying \b je me d\'e9p\'eache\b0\par
to be in a hurry \b\'eatre press\'e9\b0\par
I'm in a hurry \b je suis press\'e9\b0\par
I'm hurrying because I am in a hurry \b je me d\'e9p\'eache parce que je suis press\'e9\b0\par
we are hurrying because we are in a hurry \b nous nous d\'e9p\'eachons parce que nous sommes press\'e9\b0\par
hurry up because we are in a hurry \b d\'e9p\'eachez-vous parce que on est press\'e9\b0\par
(9) 4.02\par
to ask\par
I'm asking you \b je vous demande\b0\par
I was asking you \b je vous demandais\b0\par
I asked you \b je vous ai demand\'e9\b0\par
to call\par
to call back \b rappeler\b0\par
Will you call me back \b voulez-vous me rappeler\b0\par
I call you back later \b je vous rappelle plus tard\b0\par
I call you back tomorrow \b je vous rappelle demain\b0\par
I'm going to call you back \b je vais vous rappeler\b0\par
I will call you back \b je vous rappelerais\b0\par
to remember \b se rappeler\b0\par
I don't remember \b je ne me rappelle pas\b0\par
to ask\par
I'm asking you \b je vous demande\b0\par
I ask myself, I wonder \b je me demande\b0\par
I was wondering why \b je me demandais pourquoi\b0\par
I asked you \b je vous ai demand\'e9\b0\par
(10) 3.53\par
(\i reflexive verbs always dive from the \b\'eatre \b0 tower\i0 )\par
I lifted it up \b je l'ai lever\b0\par
I got up \b je me suis lev\'e9\par
\b0 (\i this applies even when you make a non-reflexive verb reflexive\i0 )\par
to tell\par
I say to myself\b  je me dis\b0\par
I told you \b je vous ai dis\b0\par
I said to myself that it cannot be done that way \b je me suis dit que \'e7a ne peut pas faire comme \'e7a\b0\par
I'm hurrying \b je me d\'e9p\'eache\b0\par
I was hurrying\b  je me d\'e9p\'eachais\b0\par
I hurried \b je me suis d\'e9p\'each\'e9\b0\par
we hurried \b nous nous sommes d\'e9p\'each\'e9\b0\par
I wondered why \b je me suis demand\'e9 pourquoi\b0\par
(11) 3.42\par
(\i the subjunctive tense isn't used as much in English as much as in French, e.g. you must be here. It is absolutely necessary that \ul you be here\ulnone . The subjunctive expresses doubt or uncertainty. It is always used after certain expressions implying doubt e.g. \b c'est n\'e9cessaire que, il faut que\b0\i0 )\par
(12) 3.12\par
I must ask you \b il faut que je vous demande\b0\par
(\i all \b -er\b0  verbs are the same as the present in the short box. In the long box, they end \b -ions -iez\b0\i0 )\par
you must say \b il faut que vous restiez\b0\par
we must leave now\b  il faut que nous partions mantenant\b0\par
you must start now \b il faut que vous commenciez maintenant\b0\par
we must stay here \b il faut que nous restions ici\b0\par
he must stay \b il faut que je reste\b0\par
(13) 4.57\par
I'm speaking \b je parle\b0\par
I'm leaving \b je part\b0\par
(\i so in the short box, \b -er \b0 verbs sound the final consonant and non \b -er\b0  verbs don't. In subjunctive, all verbs sound the final consonant in the short box, following the form of  "they"\i0 )\par
it is necessary that I leave \b il faut que je parte\b0\par
I must wait \b il faut que j'attende\b0\par
I must finish \b il faut que je finisse\b0\par
we must finish \b il faut que nous finissions\b0\par
you must finish \b il faut que vous finissiez\b0\par
it is necessary that you put it on the table here \b il faut que vous le mettiez sur la table ici\b0\par
he must put it here \b il faut qu'il le mette ici\b0\par
I must tell you \b il faut que je vous dise\b0\par
I must read it \b il faut que je le lise\b0\par
I must write to you\b  il faut que je vous \'e9crive\b0\par
you must write to me \b il faut que vous m'\'e9criviez\b0\par
(14) 4.28\par
(\i in English, whenever you say "I want you to" or "do you want me to", in French you say "I want that you..." followed by the subjunctive)\i0\par
I want you to stay here with me \b je veux que vous restiez ici avec moi\b0\par
what do you want me to tell you? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez que je vous dise?\b0\par
I would like you to tell me \b je voudrais que vous me disiez\b0\par
I want you to read it\b  je veux que vous le lisiez\par
\b0 I want you to write to me \b je veux que vous m'\'e9criviez\b0\par
they come \b ils viennent\b0\par
do you want me to come with you? \b est-ce que vous voulez que je vienne avec vous?\b0\par
at what time do you want me to leave? \b\'e0 quelle heure voulez-vous que je porte?\b0\par
where do you want me to put it? \b o\'f9 voulez-vous que je le mette?\b0\par
they take \b ils prennent\b0\par
do you want me to take it? \b voulez-vous que je le prenne?\b0\par
(15) 8.22\par
(\i there are four one-syllable exceptions, where "they" is not the key to the subjunctive\i0 )\par
I am\b  je suis\b0\par
that I be \b que je sois\b0\par
that we be \b que nous soyons\b0\par
at what time do you want me to be here tonight? \b\'e0 quelle heure voulez-vous que je sois ici ce soir?\b0\par
I would like you to be ready \b je voudrais que vous soyez pr\'eat\b0\par
I have \b j'ai\b0\par
that I have\b  que j'aie\b0\par
that we have \b que j'ayons\b0\par
to be \b sois soyez soyons\b0\par
to have \b aie ayez ayons\b0\par
I go \b je vais\b0\par
that I go\b  j'aille\b0\par
do you want me to go there with you? \b voulez-vous que j'y aille avec vous\b0\par
at what time do you want me to go there? \b\'e0 quelle heure voulez-vous que j'y aille\b0\par
that we go \b nous allions \b0\par
that you go \b nous alliez\b0\par
I would like you to go there with me \b je voudrais que vous y alliez avec moi\b0\par
to be\par
to have\par
to go \b aille allions alliez\b0\par
that I do\b  je fasse\par
\b0 that we do \b nous fassions\b0\par
what do you want me to do? \b que'st-ce que vous voulez que je fasse?\b0\par
what do you want me to tell you? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez que je vous dise?\b0\par
why don't you want me to do it? \b pourquoi ne voulez-vous pas que je le fasse?\b0\par
what do you want me to tell him? \b qu'est-ce que vous voulez que je lui dise?\b0\par
I don't want you to do it \b je ne veux pas que vous le fassiez\b0\par
why don't you want me to do it?\par
(16) 2.59\par
(\i two more exceptions: \b savoir\b0  becomes \b sache, sachions, sachiez\b0\i0 )\par
I must know it \b il faut que je le sache\b0\par
we must know it\b  il faut que nous le sachions\b0\par
I would like you to know it \b je voudrais que vous le sachiez\b0\par
(\i the other is \b pouvoir \b0 which becomes \b puisse\b0 . This comes from the old form \b puis\b0 , only used now in the question \b puis-je? \b0 "can I, may I?"\i0 )\par
it's important that he may see it \b c'est important qu'il puisse le voi\b0 r\par
(17) 2.22\par
(\i past subjunctive is very easy - just use \b avant que...\b0 , or:\i0 )\par
before I leave \b avant que je parte\b0\par
I left \b je suis parti\b0\par
before I left \b avant que je sais parti\b0\par
before we start \b avant que nous commencions\b0\par
before we started \b avant que nous ayons commenc\'e9\b0\par
\pard\fi-283\li283\cf0 (18) \cf1 3.12\par
\pard\par
(end of recording)\par
\par
}
 